
SECTION CVII
"Janamejaya said, 'What did the god of justice do for which he was
cursed? And who was the Brahmana ascetic from whose curse the god had to
be born in the Sudra caste?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'There was a Brahmana known by the name of Mandavya.
He was conversant with all duties and was devoted to religion, truth and
asceticism. The great ascetic used to sit at the entrance of his
hermitage at the foot of a tree, with his arms upraised in the observance
of the vow of silence. And as he sat there for years together, one day
there came into his asylum a number of robbers laden with spoil. And, O
bull in Bharata's race, those robbers were then being pursued by a
superior body as guardians of the peace. The thieves, on entering that
asylum, hid their booty there, and in fear concealed themselves
thereabout before the guards came. But scarcely had they thus concealed
themselves when the constables in pursuit came to the spot. The latter,
observing the Rishi sitting under the tree, questioned him, O king,
saying, 'O best of Brahmanas, which way have the thieves taken? Point it
out to us so that we may follow it without loss of time.' Thus questioned
by the guardians of peace the ascetic, O king, said not a word, good or
otherwise, in reply. The officers of the king, however, on searching that
asylum soon discovered the thieves concealed thereabout together with the
plunder. Upon this, their suspicion fell upon the Muni, and accordingly
they seized him with the thieves and brought him before the king. The
king sentenced him to be executed along with his supposed associates. And
the officers, acting in ignorance, carried out the sentence by impaling
the celebrated Rishi. And having impaled him, they went to the king with
the booty they had recovered. But the virtuous Rishi, though impaled and
kept without food, remained in that state for a long time without dying.
And the Rishi by his ascetic power not only preserved his life but
summoned other Rishi to the scene. And they came there in the night in
the forms of birds, and beholding him engaged in ascetic meditation
though fixed on that stake, became plunged into grief. And telling that
best of Brahmanas who they were, they asked him saying, 'O Brahmana, we
desire to know what hath been thy sin for which thou hast thus been made
to suffer the tortures of impalement!'"
