SECTION LXI
"Narada said, 'Dilipa, the son of Havila, too, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell
a prey to death. Brahmanas, vested in knowledge of Truth, devoted to the
performance of sacrifices, blessed with children and children's children
and numbering myriads upon myriads, were present at his hundreds of
sacrifices. King Dilipa, having performed various sacrifices, gave away
this earth, filled with treasures, unto the Brahmanas. At the sacrifices
of Dilipa, the roads were all made of gold. The very gods, with Indra at
their head used to come to him regarding him as Dharma himself. The upper
and lower rings of his sacrificial stake were made of gold. Eating his
Raga-khandavas, many persons, at his sacrifices, were seen to lie down on
the roads. While battling over the waters, the two wheels of Dilipa's car
never sank in that liquid. This seemed exceedingly wonderful, and never
occured to other kings, Even those that saw king Dilipa, that firm
bowman, always truthful in speech and giving away profuse gifts at his
sacrifices, succeeded in ascending to heaven. In the abode of Dilipa,
called also Khattanga, these five sounds were always to be heard, viz.,
the sound of Vedic recitations, the twang of bows, and Drink, Enjoy, and
Eat! When he died, O Srinjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the
four cardinal virtues and who superior to thee, was much superior to thy
son, thou shouldst not, saying, 'Oh, Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya,' grieve for
thy son who performed no sacrifice and made no sacrificial gifts.'"[102]
son, thou shouldst not, saying, 'Oh, Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya,' grieve for
