SECTION XLI
"Sanjaya said, 'Thou askest me, O monarch, about the prowess of the ruler
of the Sindhus. Listen to me as I describe in detail how he fought with
the Pandavas. Large steeds of the Sindhu breed, well-trained and fleet as
the wind, and obedient to the commands of the charioteer, bore him (on
that occasion). His car, duly equipped, looked like a vapoury edifice in
the welkin. His standard bearing the device of a large boar in silver,
looked exceedingly beautiful. With his white umbrella and banners, and
the yak-tails with which he was fanned--which are regal indications--he
shone like the Moon himself in the firmament. His car-fence made of iron
was decked with pearls and diamonds and gems and gold. And it looked
resplendent like the firmament bespangled with luminous bodies. Drawing
his large bow and scattering countless shafts, he once more filled up
that array in those places where openings had been made by the son of
Arjuna. And he pierced Satyaki with three arrows, and Vrikodara with
eight; and having pierced Dhrishtadyumna. with sixty arrows, he pierced
Drupada with five sharp ones, and Sikhandin with ten. Piercing then the
Kaikeyas with five and twenty arrows, Jayadratha pierced each of the five
sons of Draupadi with three arrows. And piercing Yudhishthira then with
seventy arrows, the ruler of the Sindhus pierced the other heroes of the
Pandava army with thick showers of shafts. And that feat of his seemed
exceedingly wonderful. Then, O monarch, the valiant son of Dharma, aiming
Jayadratha's bow, cut it off with a polished and well-tempered shaft,
smiling the while. Within the twinkling, however, of the eye, the ruler
of the Sindhus took up another bow and piercing Pratha (Yudhishthira)
with ten arrows struck each of the others with three shafts. Marking that
lightness of hands showed by Jayadratha, Bhima then with three
broad-headed shafts, quickly felled on the earth his bow, standard and
umbrella. The mighty Jayadratha then, taking up another bow, strung it
and felled Bhima's standard and bow and steeds. O sire! His bow cut off,
Bhimasena then jumping down from that excellent car whose steeds had been
slain, mounted on the car of Satyaki, like a lion jumping to the top of a
mountain. Seeing this, thy troops were filled with joy. And they loudly
shouted, 'Excellent! Excellent!' And they repeatedly applauded that feat
of the ruler of the Sindhus. Indeed, all creatures highly applauded that
feat of his, which consisted in his resisting, single-handed, all the
Pandavas together, excited with wrath. The path that the son of Subhadra
had made for the Pandavas by the slaughter of numerous warriors and
elephants was then filled up by the ruler of the Sindhus. Indeed, those
heroes, viz., the Matsyas, the Panchalas, the Kaikeyas, and the Pandavas,
exerting themselves vigorously, succeeded in approaching the presence of
Jayadratha, but none of them could bear him. Everyone amongst thy enemies
who endeavoured to pierce the array that had been formed by Drona, was
checked by the ruler of the Sindhus in consequence of the boon he had got
(from Mahadeva).'"
