SECTION CXX
Sanjaya said, "Thus all the Pandavas, placing Sikhandin before them
pierced Bhishma in that battle repeatedly surrounding him on all sides.
And all the Srinjayas, uniting together, struck him with dreadful
Sataghnis, and spiked maces, and battle-axes, and mallets, and short
thick clubs, and bearded darts, and other missiles, and arrows furnished
with golden wing, and darts and lances and kampanas; and with long
shafts, and arrows furnished with heads shaped like the calf-tooth, and
rockets. Thus afflicted by many, his coat of mail was pierced everywhere.
But though pierced in every vital part, Bhishma felt no pain. On the
other hand, he then seemed to his enemies to resemble in appearance the
(all-destructive) fire that rises at the end of Yuga. His bow and arrows
constituted the blazing flames (of that fire). The flight of his weapons
constituted its (friendly) breeze. The rattle of his car-wheels
constituted its heat and mighty weapons constituted its splendour. His
beautiful bow formed its fierce tongue, and the bodies of heroic
warriors, its profuse fuel. And Bhishma was seen to roll through the
midst of crowds of cars belonging to those kings, or to come out (of the
press) at times, or course once more through their midst. Then,
disregarding the king of the Panchalas and Dhrishtaketu, he penetrated, O
monarch, into the midst of the Pandava army. He then pierced the six
Pandava warriors, viz., Satyaki, and Bhima, and Dhananjaya the son of
Pandu, and Drupada, and Virata, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's race,
with many excellent arrows of great sharpness and dreadful whizz and
exceeding impetuosity, and capable of piercing through every kind of
armour. Those mighty car-warriors, however, checking those keen shafts,
afflicted Bhishma with great force, each of them striking him with ten
shafts. Those mighty shafts, whetted on stone and furnished with golden
wings, which the great car-warrior Sikhandin shot, quickly penetrated
into Bhishma's body. Then the diadem-decked (Arjuna), excited with wrath,
and placing Sikhandin ahead rushed at Bhishma and cut off the latter's
bow. Thereupon mighty car-warriors, seven in number, viz., Drona and
Kritavarman, and Jayadratha the ruler of the Sindhus, and Bhurisravas,
and Sala, and Salya, and Bhagadatta could not brook that act of Arjuna.
Inflamed with rage, they rushed at him. Indeed, those mighty
car-warriors, invoking into existence celestial weapons, fell with great
wrath upon that son of Pandu, and covered him with their arrows. And as
they rushed towards Phalguni's car, the noise made by them was heard to
resemble that made by the ocean itself when it swelleth in rage at the
end of the Yuga, Kill, Bring up (our forces), Take, Pierce, Cut off, this
was the furious uproar heard about Phalguni's car. Hearing that furious
uproar, the mighty car-warriors of the Pandava army rushed forward, O
bull of Bharata's race, for protecting Arjuna. They were Satyaki, and
Bhimasena, and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's race, and both Virata and
Drupada, and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, and the wrathful Abhimanyu. These
seven, inflamed with rage, and armed with excellent bows, rushed with
great speed. And the battle that took place between these and the Kaurava
warriors was fierce, making the hair stand on end, and resembling O chief
of the Bharatas, the battle of the gods with the Danavas. Sikhandin,
however, that foremost of car-warriors, protected in the battle by the
diadem-decked (Arjuna), pierced Bhishma, in that encounter, with ten
shafts after the latter's bow had been cut off. And he struck Bhishma's
charioteer with other shafts, and cut off the latter's standard with one
shaft. Then the son of Ganga took up another bow that was tougher. That
even was cut off by Phalguni with three sharp shafts. Indeed, that
chastiser of foes, viz., Arjuna, who was capable of drawing the bow with
even his left hand, excited with rage, one after another, cut off all the
bows that Bhishma took up. Then Bhishma, whose bows were thus cut off,
excited with rage, and licking the corners of his mouth, took up a dart
that was capable of riving a hill. In rage he hurled it at Phalguni's
car. Beholding its course towards him like the blazing bolt of heaven,
the delighter of the Pandavas fixed five sharp broad-headed arrows (on
his bow-string). And with those five arrows, O chief of the Bharatas, the
angry Arjuna cut off into five fragments that dart hurled from Bhishma's
arms. Thus cut off by the angry Arjuna, that dart then fell down like a
flash of lightning separated from a mass of clouds. Beholding his dart
cut off, Bhishma became filled with rage. That hero, that subjugator of
hostile cities, then began to reflect. And he said unto himself, 'With
only a single bow I could slay all the Pandavas, if the mighty Vishnu
himself had not been their protector. For two reasons, however, I will
not fight with the Pandavas, viz., their unslayableness, and the
femininity of Sikhandin. Formerly, when my sire wedded Kali, he pleased
(with me) gave me two boons, viz., that I should be incapable of being
slain in battle, and that my death should depend on my own choice. I
should, however, now wish my own death, this being the proper hour.'
Ascertaining this to be the resolve of Bhishma of immeasurable energy,
the Rishis and the Vasus stationed in the firmament, said, 'That which
hath been resolved by thee is approved by us also, O son! Act according
to thy resolution, O king. Withdraw thy heart from battle.' On the
conclusion, of those words, fragrant and auspicious breeze charged with
particles of water, began to blow along a natural direction.[486] And
celestial cymbals of loud sounds began to beat. And a flowery shower fell
upon Bhishma, O sire. The words spoken by the Rishis and the Vasus,
however, O king, were not heard by any one save Bhishma himself. I also
heard them, through the power conferred on me by the Muni. Great was the
grief, O monarch, that filled the hearts of the celestials at the thought
of Bhishma, that favourite of all the worlds, falling down from his car.
Having listened to these words of the celestials, Santanu's son Bhishma
of great ascetic merit rushed out at Vibhatsu, even though he was then
being pierced with sharp arrows capable of penetrating through every
armour. Then Sikhandin, O king, excited with rage, struck the grandsire
of the Bharatas in the chest with nine sharp arrows. The Kuru grandsire
Bhishma, however, though struck by him in battle, thus, trembled not, O
monarch, but remained unmoved like a mountain during an earthquake. Then
Vibhatsu, drawing his bow Gandiva with a laugh, pierced the son of Ganga
with five and twenty arrows. And once more, Dhananjaya, with great speed
and excited with wrath struck him in every vital part with hundreds of
arrows. Thus pierced by others, also with thousands of arrows, the mighty
car-warrior Bhishma pierced those others in return with great speed. And
as regards the arrows shot by those warriors, Bhishma, possessed of
prowess in battle that was incapable of being baffled, equally checked
them all with his own straight arrows. Those arrows, however, endued with
wings of gold and whetted on stone, which the mighty car-warrior
Sikhandin shot in that battle, scarcely caused Bhishma any pain. Then the
diadem-decked (Arjuna), excited with rage and placing Sikhandin to the
fore, approached Bhishma (nearer) and once more cut off his bow. And then
piercing Bhishma with ten arrows, he cut off the latter's standard with
one. And striking Bhishma's chariot with ten arrows, Arjuna caused him to
tremble. The son of Ganga then took up another bow that was stronger.
Within, however, the twinkling of an eye, as soon, in fact, as it was
taken up, Arjuna cut that bow also into three fragments with three
broad-headed shafts. And thus the son of Pandu cut off in that battle
even all the bows of Bhishma. After that, Bhishma the son of Santanu, no
longer desired to battle with Arjuna. The latter, however, then pierced
him with five and twenty arrows. That great bowman, thus pierced greatly,
then addressed Dussasana, and skid, 'Behold, Partha, that great
car-warrior of the Pandavas, excited with wrath in battle, pierceth me
alone with many thousands of arrows. He is incapable of being vanquished
in battle by the wielder of the thunder-bolt himself. As regards myself
also, O hero, the very gods, Danavas and Rakshasas united together, are
incapable of vanquishing me. What I shall say then of mighty car-warriors
among men?' While Bhishma was thus speaking to Dussasana, Phalguni with
sharp shafts, and placing Sikhandin to the fore, pierced Bhishma in that
battle. Then Bhishma, deeply and excessively pierced by the wielder of
Gandiva with keen-pointed shafts, once more addressed Dussasana with a
smile and said, 'These arrows coursing towards me in one continuous line,
whose touch resembleth that of heaven's bolt, have been shot by Arjuna.
These are not Sikhandin's. Cutting me to the quick, piercing through even
my hard coat of mail, and striking me with the force of mushalas, these
arrows are not Sikhandin's. Of touch as hard as that of the Brahmana's
rod (of chastisement),[487] and of impetus unbearable as that of the
thunder-bolt, these arrows are afflicting my vital forces. These are not
Sikhandin's. Of the touch of maces and spiked bludgeons, those arrows are
destroying my vital forces like messengers of Death commissioned (by the
grim king himself). These are not Sikhandin's. Like angry snakes of
virulent poison, projecting their tongues out, these are penetrating into
my vitals. These are not Sikhandin's--these that cut me to the quick like
the cold of winter cutting kine to the quick. Save the heroic wielder of
Gandiva, viz., the ape-bannered Jishnu, even all other kings united
together cannot cause me pain. Saying these words, Bhishma, the valiant
son of Santanu, as if for the object of consuming the Pandavas, hurled a
dart at Partha. Partha, however, caused that dart to drop down, cutting
it into three fragments with three shafts, in the very sight, O Bharata,
of all the Kuru heroes of thy army. Desirous of obtaining either death or
victory, the son of Ganga then took up a sword and a shield decked with
gold. Before, however, he could come down from his car, Arjuna cut off by
means of his arrows, that shield into a hundred fragments. And that feat
of his seemed exceedingly wonderful. Then the king Yudhishthira urged his
own troops, saying, 'Rush ye at Ganga's son. Do not entertain the
slightest fear'. Then, armed with bearded darts, and lances, and arrows,
from all sides, with axes, and excellent scimitars, and long shafts of
great sharpness, with calf-toothed arrows, and broad-headed shafts, they
all rushed at that single warrior. Then arose from among the Pandava host
a loud shout. Then thy sons also, O king, desirous of Bhishma's victory,
surrounded him and uttered leonine shouts. Fierce was the battle fought
there between thy troops and those of the enemy on that the tenth day, O
king, when Bhishma and Arjuna met together. Like unto the vortex that
occurs at the spot where the Ganga meets the Ocean, for a short while a
vortex occurred there where the troops of both armies met and struck one
another down. And the Earth, wet with gore, assumed a fierce form. And
the even and the uneven spots on her surface could no longer be
distinguished. Although Bhishma was pierced in all his vital limbs, yet
on that the tenth day he stayed (calmly) in battle, having slain ten
thousand warriors. Then that great bowman, Partha, stationed at the head
of his troops, broke the centre of the Kuru army. Ourselves then, afraid
of Kunti's son Dhananjaya having white steeds attached to his car, and
afflicted by him with polished weapons, fled away from the battle. The
Sauviras, the Kitavas, the Easterners, the Westerners, the Northerners,
the Malavas, the Abhishahas, the Surasenas, the Sivis, the Vasatis, the
Salwas, the Sayas, the Trigartas, the Amvashthas, and the
Kaikeyas.[488]--these and many other illustrious warriors,--afflicted
with arrows and pained by their wounds, abandoned Bhishma in that battle
while he was fighting with the diadem-decked (Arjuna). Then a great many
warriors, surrounding that single warrior on all sides, defeated the
Kurus (that protected him) and covered him with shower of arrows. Throw
down, Seize, Fight, Cut into pieces,--this was the furious uproar, O
king, heard in the vicinity of Bhishma's car. Having slain in that
battle, O monarch, (his foes) by hundreds and thousands, there was not in
Bhishma's body space of even two fingers' breadth that was not pierced
with arrows. Thus was thy sire mangled with arrows of keen points by
Phalguni in that battle. And then he fell down from his car with his head
to the east, a little before sunset, in the very sight of thy sons. And
while Bhishma fell, loud cries of alas and oh, O Bharata, were heard in
the welkin uttered by the celestials and the kings of the earth. And
beholding the high-souled grandsire falling down (from his car), the
hearts of all of us fell with him. That foremost of all bowmen, that
mighty-armed hero, fell down, like an uprooted standard of Indra, making
the earth tremble the while.[489] Pierced all over with arrows, his body
touched not the ground. At that moment, O bull of Bharata's race, a
divine nature took possession of that great bowman lying on a bed of
arrows. The clouds poured a (cool) shower (over him) and the Earth
trembled. While falling he had marked that the Sun was then in the
southern solstice. That hero, therefore, permitted not his senses to
depart, thinking of that (inauspicious) season (of death). And all around
in the welkin he heard celestial voices saying, 'Why, Oh why, should
Ganga's son, that foremost of all warriors of weapons, yield up his life
during the southern declension?' Hearing these words, the son of Ganga
answered, 'I am alive!' Although fallen upon the earth, the Kuru
grandsire Bhishma, expectant of the northern declension, suffered not his
life to depart. Ascertaining that to be his resolve, Ganga, the daughter
of Himavat, sent unto him the great Rishis in swanlike form. Then those
Rishis in the forms of swans inhabiting the Manasa lake, quickly rose up,
and came together, for obtaining a sight of the Kuru grandsire Bhishma,
to that spot where that foremost of men was lying on his bed of arrows.
Then those Rishis in swanlike forms, coming to Bhishma, beheld that
perpetuator of Kuru's race lying on his bed of arrows. Beholding that
high-souled son of Ganga, that chief of the Bharatas, they walked round
him, and the Sun being then in the southern solstice, they said,
addressing one another, these words, 'Being a high-souled person, why
should Bhishma pass out (of the world) during the southern declension?'
Having said these words, those swans went away, proceeding towards the
southern direction. Endued with great intelligence, Bhishma, O Bharata.
beholding them, reflected for a moment. And the son of Santanu then said
unto them. 'I will never pass out (of the world) as long as the Sun is in
the southern solstice. Even this is my resolve. I will proceed to my own
ancient abode when the Sun reacheth the northern solstice. Ye swans, I
tell you this truly. Expectant of the northern declension I will hold my
life. Since I have the fullest control over the yielding up of my life, I
will, therefore, hold life, expectant of death during the northern
declension. The boon that was granted to me by my illustrious sire, to
the effect that my death would depend on my own wish O, let that boon
become true. I will hold my life, since I have control in the matter of
laying it down.' Having said these words to those swans, he continued to
lie down on his bed of arrows.
"When that crest of the Kuru race, viz., Bhishma of great energy, fell
down, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas uttered leonine shouts. When the
grandsire of the Bharatas who was endued with great might was overthrown,
thy son, O bull of Bharata's race, knew not what to do. And all the Kurus
were entirely deprived of their senses. And the Kurus headed by Kripa,
and Duryodhana, sighed and wept. And from grief they remained for a long
while deprived of their senses. And they remained perfectly still, O
monarch, without setting their hearts on battle. As if seized by thighs,
they stood motionless, without proceeding against the Pandavas. When
Santanu's son Bhishma of mighty energy, who was (regarded as) unslayable,
was slain, all of us thought that the destruction of the Kuru king was at
hand.[490] Vanquished by Savyasachin, with our foremost heroes slain, and
ourselves mangled with sharp arrows, we knew not what to do. And the
heroic Pandavas possessed of massive arms that looked like spiked maces,
having obtained the victory and won a highly blessed state in the other
world,[491] all blew their great conches. And the Somakas and the
Panchalas all rejoiced, O king. Then when thousands of trumpets were
blown, the mighty Bhimasena slapped his arm-pits and uttered loud shouts.
When the all-powerful son of Ganga was slain, the heroic warriors of both
armies, laying down their weapons, began to reflect thoughtfully. And
some uttered loud shrieks and some fled away, and some were deprived of
their senses. And some censured the practices of the Kshatriya order and
some applauded Bhishma. And the Rishis and the Pitris all applauded
Bhishma of high vows. And the deceased ancestors of the Bharatas also
praised Bhishma. Meanwhile the valiant and intelligent Bhishma, the son
of Santanu, having recourse to that Yoga which is taught in the great
Upanishads and engaged in mental prayers, remained quiet, expectant of
his hour."
