SECTION L
"Sanjaya said, 'While Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, was indulging in such
lamentations, the great Rishi Krishna Dwaipayana came to him. Worshipping
him duly, and causing him to be seated, Yudhishthira, afflicted with
grief on account of the death of his brother's son, said, 'Alas, while
battling with many mighty bowmen, the son of Subhadra, surrounded by
several great car-warriors of unrighteous propensities, hath been slain
on the field. The slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Subhadra, was a
child in years and of childish understanding.[82] He fought in battle
against desperate odds. I asked him to open a passage for us in battle.
He penetrated within the hostile army, but we could not follow him,
obstructed by the ruler of the Sindhus. Alas, they that betake themselves
to battle as a profession, always fight with antagonists equally
circumstanced with themselves. This battle, however, that the enemy
fought with Abhimanyu, was an extremely unequal one. It is that which
grieves me greatly and draws tears from me. Thinking of this, I fail to
regain peace of mind.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'The illustrious Vyasa, addressing Yudhishthira who
was indulging in such lamentations and who was thus unmanned by an
accession of sorrow, said these words.'
"Vyasa said, 'O Yudhishthira, O thou of great wisdom, O thou that art
master of all branches of knowledge, persons like thee never suffer
themselves to be stupefied by calamities. This brave youth, having slain
numerous foes hath ascended to heaven. Indeed, that best of persons,
(though a child), acted, however, like one of matured years. O
Yudhishthira, this law is incapable of being transgressed. O Bharata,
Death takes all viz., Gods and Dhanavas and Gandharvas (without
exception).'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Alas, these lords of earth, that lie on the bare
earth, slain in the midst of their forces, bereft of consciousness, were
possessed of great might. Others (of their class) possessed strength
equal to that of ten thousand elephants. Others, again, were endued with
the impetuosity and might of the very wind. They have all perished in
battle, slain by men of their own class. I do not behold the person (save
one of their own class) who could slay any of them in battle. Endued with
great prowess, they were possessed of great energy and great might. Alas,
they who used daily to come to battle with this hope firmly implanted in
their hearts, viz., that they would conquer, alas even they, possessed of
great wisdom, are lying on a field, struck (with weapons) and deprived of
life. The significance of the word Death hath today been made
intelligible, for these lords of earth, of terrible prowess, have almost
all been dead. Those heroes are lying motionless; reft of vanity, having
succumbed to foes. Many princes, filled with wrath, have been victimised
before the fire (of their enemies' wrath). A great doubt possesses me,
viz., whence is Death? Whose (offspring) is Death? What is Death? Why
does Death take away creatures? O grandsire, O thou that resemblest a
god, tell me this.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Unto Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, asking him thus, the
illustrious Rishi, comforting him, said these words.'
"Vyasa said, As regards the matter in hand, O king, this ancient story of
what Narada had in days of old said unto Akampana is cited. King
Akampana, O monarch, I know, while in this world was afflicted with very
great and unbearable grief on account of the death of his son, I will now
tell these the excellent story about the origin of Death. Having listened
to it, thou wilt be emancipated from sorrow and the touch of affection's
tie. Listen to me, O sire, as I recite this ancient history. This history
is, indeed, excellent. It enhanceth the period of life, killeth grief and
conduceth to health. It is sacred, destructive of large bodies of foes,
and auspicious of all auspicious things. Indeed, this history is even as
the study of the Vedas. O monarch, it should every morning be listened to
by the foremost of kings who are desirous of longlived children and their
own good.
"In days of old, O sire, there was a king named Akampana. Once, on the
field of battle, he was surrounded by his foes and nearly overpowered by
them. He had a son who was called Hari. Equal to Narayana himself in
might, that latter was exceedingly handsome, accomplished in weapons,
gifted with great intelligence, possessed of might, resembled Sakra
himself in battle. Encompassed by countless foes on the field of battle,
he sped thousands of shafts at those warriors and the elephants that
surrounded him. Having achieved the most difficult feats in battle, O
Yudhishthira, that scorcher of foes was, at last, slain in the midst of
the army. Performing the obsequies of his son, king Akampana cleansed
himself.[83] Grieving, however, for his son day and night, the king
failed to regain happiness of mind. Informed of his grief on account of
the death of his son, the celestial Rishi Narada came to his presence.
The blessed king, beholding the celestial Rishi, told the latter
everything that had happened unto him, viz., his defeat at the hands of
his foes, and the slaughter of his son. And the king said, 'My son was
endued with great energy, and equalled Indra or Vishnu himself in
splendour. That mighty son of mine, having displayed his prowess on the
field against countless foes was at last slain! O illustrious one, who is
this Death? What is the measure of his energy, strength and prowess? O
foremost of intelligent persons, I desire to hear all this truly.'
Hearing these words of his, the boon giving lord, Narada., recited the
following elaborate history, destructive of grief on account of a son's
death.'
"Narada said. 'Listen, O mighty-armed king, to this long history, exactly
as I have heard it, O monarch! In the beginning, the Grandsire Brahma
created all creatures. Endued with mighty energy, he saw that the
creation bore no signs of decay. Thereat, O king, the Creator began to
think about the destruction of the universe. Reflecting on the matter, O
monarch, the Creator failed to find any means of destruction. He then
became angry, and in consequence of his anger a fire sprang from the sky.
That fire spread in all directions for consuming everything of the
universe. Then heaven, sky, and earth, all became filled with fire. And
thus the Creator began to consume the whole mobile and immobile universe.
Thereby all creatures, mobile and immobile, were destroyed. Indeed, the
mighty Brahma, frightening everything by the force of his wrath, did all
this, Then Hara, otherwise called Sthanu or Siva, with matted locks on
his head, that Lord of all wanderers of the night, appealed to the divine
Brahma, the Lord of the gods. When Sthanu fell (at Brahma's feet) from a
desire of doing good to all creatures, the Supreme Deity to that greatest
of ascetics, blazing with splendour, said, 'What wish of thine shall we
accomplish, O thou that deservest to have all thy wishes fulfilled? O
thou that hast been born of our wish! We shall do all that may be
agreeable to thee! Tell us, O Sthanu, what is thy wish?'"
