SECTION XVIII
"Sanjaya said, 'The Samsaptakas,[32] then, filled with joy, took their
stand on a level field, having, with their cars, formed an array in the
shape of the half-moon. And those tigers among men, beholding the
diadem-decked (Arjuna) come towards them, were, O sire, filled with
delight and uttered loud shouts. That noise filled the sky and all the
points of the compass, cardinal and subsidiary. And because it was an
open plain covered only with men, it produced no echoes. Ascertaining
them to be exceedingly delighted, Dhananjaya, with a little smile, said
these words unto Krishna: 'Behold, O thou that hast Devaki for thy
mother, those Trigarta brothers, who are about to perish in battle, are
filled with delight at a time when they should weep. Or, this is, without
doubt, the hour of delight (with them) since they will obtain those
excellent regions that are unattainable by cowards.' Having said these
words unto the mighty-armed Hrishikesa, Arjuna came upon the arrayed
ranks of the Trigartas in battle, taking up then his conch called
Devadatta decked with gold, he blew it with great force, filling all the
points of the compass with its blare. Terrified by that blare, that
car-host of the Samsaptakas stood motionless in battle, as if it was
petrified. And all their animals stood with eyes wide open, ears and
necks and lips paralysed, and legs motionless. And they passed urine and
vomited blood. Regaining consciousness then, and placing their ranks in
proper order, they shot their arrows all at once at the son of Pandu.
Capable of displaying his prowess with great speed, Arjuna, with five and
ten arrows cut off those thousands of arrows before they could reach him.
They then pierced Arjuna, each with ten arrows. Partha pierced them with
three arrows. Then each of them, O king, pierced Partha with five arrows.
Endued with great prowess, he pierced each of them in return with two
arrows. And, once again, excited with wrath, they quickly poured upon
Arjuna and Kesava countless arrows like the clouds pouring upon a lake
their incessant showers. Then those thousands of arrows fell upon Arjuna,
like swarms of bees upon a flowering cluster of trees in the forest. Then
deeply pierced Arjuna's diadem with thirty shafts, endued with the
strength of adamant with those shafts equipped with wings of gold fixed
on his diadem, Arjuna, as if decked with ornaments of gold, shone like
the (newly) risen sun. The son of Pandu then, in that battle, with a
broad-headed arrow, cut off the leathern fence of Suvahu, and covered
Sudharman and Sudhanwan, and Suvahu pierced Partha with ten arrows.
Partha, having the excellent ape-device on his banner, pierced all of
them in return with many arrows, and also cut off, with some broad-headed
shafts, their standards made of gold. And cutting off the bow of
Sudhanwan, he slew with his arrows the latter's steeds. And then he cut
off from his trunk the latter's head graced with turban. Upon the fall of
that hero, his followers were terrified. And stricken with panic, they
all fled away to where Duryodhana's forces were. Then Vasava's son,
filled with wrath, smote that mighty host with incessant showers of
arrows, like the sun destroying darkness by means of his incessant rays.
Then when that host broke and melted away on all sides, and Arjuna was
filled with wrath, the Trigartas were struck with fear. While being
slaughtered by Partha with his straight shafts, they remained where they
stood, deprived of their senses, like a terrified, herd of deer. Then the
king of the Trigartas, filled with rage, addressed those mighty
car-warrior, saying, 'Do not fly, ye heroes! It behoveth ye not to be
frightened. Having, in the sight of all the troops, taken those terrible
steps, repairing thither, what shall ye say unto the leaders of
Duryodhana's host? Do we not incur ridicule in the world by such a
(cowardly) act in battle? Therefore, stop ye all, and fight according to
your strength.' Thus addressed, O king, those heroes, repeatedly uttering
loud shouts, blew their conchs, gladdening one another. Then those
Samsaptakas once more returned to the field, with the Narayana cow-herds,
resolved to fade Death himself.'"
