SECTION XXIII
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Tell me, O Sanjaya, the distinctive indications of
the cars of all those who, excited with wrath and headed by Bhimasena,
had proceeded against Drona.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Beholding Vrikodara advancing (on a car drawn) by steeds
of dappled hue (like: that of the antelope), the brave grandson of Sini
(Satyaki) proceeded, borne by steeds of a silvery hue. The irresistible
Yudhamanyu, excited with rage, proceeded against Drona, borne by
excellent steeds of variegated hue. Dhristadyumna, the son of the
Panchala king, proceeded, borne by steeds of great fleetness in trappings
of gold and of the hue of pigeons.[43] Desirous of protecting his sire,
and wishing him complete success, Dhristadyumna's son, Kshatradharman of
regulated vows, proceeded., borne by red steeds. Kshatradeva, the son of
Sikhandin, himself urging well-decked steeds of the hue of lotus-leaves
and with eyes of pure white, proceeded (against Drona). Beautiful steeds
of the Kamvoja breed, decked with the feathers of the green parrot,
bearing Nakula, quickly ran towards thy army. Dark steeds of the clouds
wrathfully bore Uttamaujas, O Bharata, to battle, against the invincible
Drona, standing with arrows aimed. Steeds, fleet as the wind, and of
variegated hue, bore Sahadeva with upraised weapons to that fierce
battle. Of great impetuosity, and possessed of the fleetness of the wind,
steeds of the ivory hue and having black manes on the neck, bore
Yudhishthira, that tiger among men. And many warriors followed
Yudhishthira, borne on their steeds, decked in trappings of gold and all
fleet as the wind. Behind the king was the royal chief of the Panchalas,
viz., Drupada, with a golden umbrella over his head and himself protected
by all those soldiers (that followed Yudhishthira). That great bowman
among all the kings, viz., Sautabhi, proceeded, borne by beautiful steeds
capable of bearing every noise. Accompanied by all the great
car-warriors, Virata quickly followed the former. The Kaikeyas and
Sikhandin, and Dhrishtaketu, surrounded by their respective troops,
followed the ruler of Matsyas. Excellent steeds of the (pale red) hue of
trumpet-flowers, looked exceedingly beautiful as they bore Virata. Fleet
steeds of yellow colour and decked in chains of gold, bore with great
speed the son (Uttara) of that slayer of foes, viz., Virata, the royal
chief of the Matsyas. The five Kekaya brothers were borne by steeds of
deep red hue. Of the splendour of gold and owning standards of the red
hue, and decked with chains of gold, all of them heroes, accomplished in
battle, they proceeded, clad in mail, and showering arrows like the very
clouds. Excellent steeds, the gift of Tumvuru, of the hue of unbaked
earthen pots, bore Sikhandin, the Panchala prince of immeasurable energy.
Altogether, twelve thousand mighty car-warriors of the Panchala race
proceeded to battle. Of these, six thousand followed Sikhandin. Sportive
steeds, O sire, of the dappled hue of the antelope, bore the son of
Sisupal, that tiger among men. That bull among the Chedis, viz.,
Dhrishtaketu, endued with great strength, and difficult of being
vanquished in battle, proceeded, borne by Kamvoja steeds of variegated
hue. Excellent steeds of the Sindhu breed, of beautiful limbs, and of the
hue of the smoke of straw, quickly bore the Kaikeya prince,
Vrihatkshatra. Possessed of eyes of pure white, of the hue of the lotus,
born in the country of the Valhikas, and decked with ornaments, bore
Sikhandin's son, the brave Kshatradeva.[44] Decked in trappings of gold,
and possessed of the hue of red silk, quiet steeds bore Senavindu, that
chastiser of foes, to battle. Excellent steeds of the hue of cranes, bore
to battle the youthful and delicate son of the king of the Kasis, that
mighty car-warrior. White steeds with black necks, endued with the speed
of the mind, O monarch, and exceedingly obedient to the driver, bore
prince Prativindhya. Whitish yellow steeds bore Sutasoma, the son of
Arjuna, whom the latter had obtained from Soma himself. He was born in
the Kuru city known by the name of Udayendu. Endued with effulgence of a
thousand moons, and because he also had won great renown in an assembly
of the Somakas, he came to be called Sutasoma. Steeds of the hue of Sala
flowers or of morning sun bore Nakula's son Satanika worthy of every
praise. Steeds decked in trappings of gold, and endued with the hue of
the peacock's neck, bore that tiger among men, Srutakarman, the son of
Draupdi (by Bhima). Excellent steeds of the hue of the king-fishers bore
Draupadi's son Srutkirti to that battle, who like Partha was an ocean of
learning. Steeds of a tawny hue bore the youthful Abhimanyu who was
regarded as superior to Krishna or Partha one and a half times in battle.
Gigantic steeds bore Yuyutsu to battle, that only warrior amongst the
sons of Dhritarashtra who (abandoning his brothers) hath sided with the
Pandavas. Plump and well-decked steeds of the hue of the (dried) paddy
stalk bore Vardhakshemi of great activity to that dreadful battle. Steeds
with black legs, equipped in breast-plates of gold, and exceedingly
obedient to the driver, bore youthful Sauchitti to battle. Steeds whose
backs were covered with golden armour, decked with chains of gold,
well-broken, and of the hue of red silk, bore Srenimat. Steeds of a red
hue bore the advancing Satyadhriti accomplished in the science of arms
and in the divine Vedas. That Panchala who was commander (of the Pandava
army) and who took Drona as the victim allotted to his share,--that
Dhrishtadyumna,--was borne by steeds of the hue of pigeons. Him followed
Satyadhriti, and Sauchitti irresistible in battle, and Srenimat, and
Vasudana, and Vibhu, the son of the ruler of the Kasis. These had fleet
steeds of the best Kamvoja breed decked with chains of gold. Each
resembling Yama or Vaisravana, they proceeded to battle, striking fear
into the hearts of the hostile soldiers. The Prabhadrakas of the Kamvoja
country, numbering six thousand, with upraised weapons, with excellent
steeds of diverse hues on their gold-decked cars, with stretched bows and
making their foes tremble with their showers of arrows and resolved to
die together,[45] followed Dhristadyumna. Excellent steeds of the hue of
tawny silk, decked with beautiful chains of gold, cheerfully bore
Chekitana. Arjuna's maternal uncle Purujit, otherwise called Kuntibhoja,
came borne by excellent steeds of the colour of the rainbow. Steeds of
the colour of star-bespangled firmament bore to battle king Rochamana.
Steeds of the hue of the red deer, with white streaks over their bodies,
bore the Panchala prince Singhasena, the son of Gopati. That tiger among
the Panchalas who is known by the name of Janamejaya, had excellent
steeds of the hue of mustard flowers. Fleet, gigantic and dark blue
steeds decked with chains of gold, with backs of the hue of curd and
faces of the hue of the moon, bore with great speed the ruler of the
Panchalas. Brave steeds with beautiful heads, (white) as the stalks of
reeds, and a splendour resembling that of the firmament or the lotus,
bore Dandadhara. Light brown steeds with backs of the hue of the mouse,
and with necks proudly drawn up, bore Vyaghradatta to battle.
Dark-spotted steeds bore that tiger among men, viz., Sudhanwan, the
prince of Panchala. Of fierce impetuosity resembling that of Indra's
thunder, beautiful steeds of the hue of Indragopakas, with variegated
patches, bore Chitrayudha. Decked with golden chains, steeds whose
bellies were of the hue of the Chakravaka bore Sukshatra, the son of the
ruler of the Kosalas. Beautiful and tall steeds of variegated hue and
gigantic bodies, exceedingly docile, and decked with chains of gold, bore
Satyadhriti accomplished in battle. Sukla advanced to battle with his
standard and armour and bow and steeds all of the same white hue. Steeds
born on the sea-coast and white as the moon, bore Chandrasena of fierce
energy, the son of Samudrasena. Steeds of the hue of the blue lotus and
decked with ornaments of gold and adorned with beautiful floral wreaths,
bore Saiva owning a beautiful car to battle. Superior steeds of the hue
of Kalaya flowers, with white and red streaks, bore Rathasena difficult
of being resisted in battle. White steeds bore that king who slew the
Patachcharas and who is regarded as the bravest of men. Superior steeds
of the hue of Kinsuka flowers bore Chitrayudha decked with beautiful
garlands and owning beautiful armour and weapons and standard. King Nila
advanced to battle, with standard and armour and bow and banner and
steeds all of the same blue colour. Chitra advanced to battle with
car-fence and standard and bow all decked with diverse kinds of gems, and
beautiful steeds and banner. Excellent steeds of the hue of the lotus
bore Hemavarna, the son of Rochamana. Chargers, capable of bearing all
kinds of weapons, of brave achievements in battle, possessed of vertebral
columns of the hue of reeds, having white testicles, and endued with the
colour of the hen's egg, bore Dandaketu. The mighty Sarangadhwaja, endued
with wealth of energy, the king of the Pandyas, on steeds of the hue of
the moon's rays and decked with armour set with stones of lapis lazuli,
advanced upon Drona, stretching his excellent bow. His country having
been invaded and his kinsmen having fled, his father had been slain by
Krishna in battle. Obtaining weapons then from Bhishma and Drona, Rama
and Kripa, prince Sarangadhwaja became, in weapons, the equal of Rukmi
and Karna and Arjuna and Achyuta. He then desired to destroy the city of
Dwaraka and subjugate the whole world. Wise friends, however, from desire
of doing him good, counselled him against that course. Giving up all
thoughts of revenge, he is now ruling his own dominions. Steeds that were
all of the hue of the Atrusa flower bore a hundred and forty thousand
principle car-warriors that followed that Sarangadhwaja, the king of the
Pandyas. Steeds of diverse hues and diverse kinds of forces, bore the
heroic Ghatotkacha. Mighty steeds of gigantic size, of the Aratta breed,
bore the mighty-armed Vrihanta of red eyes mounted on his golden car,
that prince, viz., who, rejecting the opinions of all the Bharatas, hath
singly, from his reverence for Yudhishthira. gone over to him, abandoning
all his cherished desire.[46] Superior steeds of the hue of gold,
followed that foremost of kings viz., the virtuous Yudhishthira at his
back. Large number of Prabhadrakas, of celestial shapes, advanced to
battle, with steeds of diverse excellent colours. All of them owning
standards of gold and prepared to struggle vigorously, proceeded with
Bhimasena, and wore the aspect, O monarch, of the denizens of heaven with
Indra at their head. That assembled host of Prabhadrakas was much liked
by Dhristadyumna.'
"Bharadwaja's son, however, O monarch, surpassed all the warriors in
splendour. His standard, with a black deer-skin waving on its top and the
beautiful water-pot, O monarch, that it bore, looked exceedingly
beautiful. And Bhimasena's standard, bearing the device of a gigantic
lion in silver with its eyes made of lapis lazuli, looked exceedingly
resplendent. The standard of Yudhishthira of great energy, bearing the
device of a golden moon with planets around it, looked very beautiful.
Two large and beautiful kettle-drums, called Nanda and Upananda, were
tied to it. Played upon by machinery, these produced excellent music that
enhanced the delight of all who heard it. For terrifying the foe, we
beheld that tall and fierce standard of Nakula, placed on his car bearing
the device of a Sarabha with its back made of gold. A beautiful silver
swan with bells and banner terrible to look at and enhancing the grief of
the foe, was seen on Sahadeva's standard. The standards of the five sons
of Draupadi bore on them the excellent images of Dharma, Marut, Sakra,
and the twin Aswins. On the car, O king, of the youthful Abhimanyu was an
excellent standard that bore a golden peacock, which was bright as heated
gold. On Ghatotkacha's standard, O king, a vulture shone brightly, and
his steeds also were capable of going everywhere at will, like those of
Ravana in days of yore. In Yudhishthira's hands was the celestial bow
called Mahendra; and in the hands of Bhimasena, O king, was the celestial
bow called Vayavya. For the protection of the three worlds Brahman
created a bow. That celestial and indestructible bow was held by
Phalguni. The Vaishnava bow was held by Nakula, and the bow called Aswina
was held by Sahadeva. That celestial and terrible bow called the
Paulastya, was held by Ghatotkacha. The five jewels of bows born by the
five sons of Draupadi were the Raudra, the Agneya, the Kauverya, the
Yamya, and the Girisa. That excellent and best of bows, called the
Raudra, which Rohini's son (Valadeva) had obtained, the latter gave unto
the high-souled son of Subhadra, having been gratified with him. These
and many other standards decked with gold, were seen there, belonging to
brave warriors, all of which enhanced the fear of their foes. The host
commanded by Drona, which numbered not a single coward, and in which
countless standards rising together seemed to obstruct the welkin, then
looked, O monarch, like images on a canvas. We heard the names and
lineage, O king, of brave warriors rushing towards Drona in that battle
like to what is heard, O monarch, at a self-choice.[47]
"Then royal Drupada advanced against him at the head of a mighty
division. The encounter between those two old men at the heads of their
respective forces became terrible like that between two mighty leaders,
with rent temples, of two elephantine herds. Vinda and Anuvinda of
Avanti, with their troops encountered Virata, the ruler of Matsyas at the
head of his forces, like Indra and Agni in days of old encountering the
(Asura) Vali. That awful encounter between the Matsyas and the Kekayas,
in which steeds and car-warriors and elephants fought most fearlessly,
resembled that between the gods and the Asuras in days of old.
Bhutakarman, otherwise called Sabhapati, kept away from Drona. Nakula's
son Satanika, as the latter advanced, scattering showers of arrows. Then
the heir of Nakula, with three broad-headed shafts of great sharpness,
deprived Bhutakarman of both his arms and head in that battle. Vivinsati
resisted the heroic Sutasoma of great prowess, as the latter advanced
towards Drona, scattering showers of arrows. Sutasoma, however, excited
with wrath, pierced his uncle Vivinsati with straight arrows, and cased
in mail, stood ready for the combat. Bhimaratha, (brother of Duryodhana),
with six sharp shafts of great swiftness and made wholly of iron,
despatched Salwa along with his steeds and charioteer to Yama's abode.
Chitrasena's son, O king, opposed thy (grand) son Srutakarman as the
latter came, borne by steeds, looking like peacocks. Those two grandsons
of thine, both difficult of being vanquished in battle, and each desirous
of slaying the other, fought vigorously for the success of the objects of
their respective sires. Beholding Prativindhya staying at the van of that
dreadful battle, Drona's son (Aswatthaman), desirous of protecting the
honour of his sire, resisted the former with his shafts. Prativindhya,
then, excited with rage pierced Aswatthaman, bearing on his standard the
device of a lion's tail and staying in battle for the sake of his father,
with many sharp shafts. The (eldest) son of Draupadi then scattered over
Drona's son showers of arrows, like a sower, O bull among men, scattering
seeds on the soil at the sowing season.[48] The son of Duhsasana resisted
the mighty car-warrior Srutakirti, the son of Arjuna by Draupadi, as the
latter was rushing towards Drona. That son of Arjuna, however, who was
equal to Arjuna himself, cutting off the former's bow and standard and
charioteer with three broad-headed arrows of great sharpness, proceeded
against Drona. Duryodhana's son, Lakshmana, resisted the slayer of the
Patachcharas,--him, that is, O king, who is regarded by both the armies
as the bravest of the brave. The latter, however, cutting off both the
bow and the standard of Lakshmana, and showering upon him many arrows,
flared up with splendour. The youthful Vikarna of great wisdom resisted
Sikhandin, the youthful son of Yajnasena, as the latter advanced in that
battle. Yajnasena's son then covered the former with showers of arrows.
The mighty son Vikarna, baffling those arrowy showers, looked resplendent
on the field of battle. Angada resisted with showers of arrows the heroic
Uttamaujas in that battle as the latter rushed towards Drona. That
encounter between those two lions among men became frightful, and it
filled both them and the troops with great zeal. The great bowman
Durmukha, endued with great might, resisted with his shafts the heroic
Purujit as the latter proceeded towards Drona. Furujit struck Durmukha
between his eye-brows with a long shaft. Thereupon, Durmukha's face
looked beautiful like a lotus with its stalk. Karna resisted with showers
of arrows the five Kekaya brothers, owning red standards, as they
proceeded towards Drona. Scorched with the arrowy showers of Karna, those
five brothers covered Karna with their arrows. Karna, in return,
repeatedly covered them with showers of arrows. Covered with arrows,
neither Karna nor the five brother could be seen with their steeds,
charioteers, standards, and cars. Thy sons, Durjaya, Jaya, and Vijaya,
resisted Nila, and the ruler of the Kasis, and Jayatsena, three against.
And the combat between those warriors deepened and gladdened the hearts
of the spectators like those between a lion, a tiger, and a wolf on the
one side and a bear, a buffalo, and a bull on the other. The brothers
Kshemadhurti and Vrihanta mangled Satyaki of the Satwata race with their
keen arrows, as the latter proceeded against Drona. The battle between
those two on one side and Satyaki on the other became exceedingly
wonderful to behold, like that between a lion and two mighty elephants
with rent temples in the forest. The king of the Chedis, excited with
wrath, and shooting many warriors, kept away from Drona, king Amvashtha,
that hero who always delighted, in battle. Then king Amvashtha pierced
his antagonist with a long arrow capable of penetrating into the very
bones. Thereupon, the latter, with bow and arrow loosened from his grasp,
fell down from his car on the ground. The noble Kripa, son of Saradwata,
with many small arrows resisted Vardhakshemi of the Vrishni race who was
the embodiment of wrath (in battle). They that looked at Kripa, son of
Saradwata, with many small arrows, resisted Vardhakshemi of the Vrishni
race who was the embodiment of wrath (in battle). They that looked at
Kripa and Vardhakshemi, those heroes conversant with every mode of
warfare, thus engaged in encountering each other, became so absorbed in
it that, they could not attend to anything else. Somadatta's son, for
enhancing the glory of Drona, resisted king Manimat of great activity as
the latter came to fight. Then Manimat quickly cut off the bowstring, the
standard, the banner, the charioteer and the umbrella of Somadatta's son
and caused them to fall down from the latter's car.[49] The son of
Somadatta then, bearing the device of the sacrificial stake on his
standard, that slayer of foes, quickly jumping down from his car, cut off
with his large swords, his antagonist with his steeds, charioteer,
standard, and car. Re-ascending then upon his own car, and taking up
another bow, and guiding his steeds himself, he began, O monarch, to
consume the Pandava host. Vrishasena (the son of Karna), competent for
the feat, resisted with showers of arrows king Pandava who was rushing to
battle like Indra himself following the Asuras for smiting them. With
maces and spiked bludgeons, and swords and axes and stones, short clubs
and mallets, and discs, short arrows and battle-axes with dust and wind,
and fire and water, and ashes and brick-bats, and straw and trees,
afflicting and smitting, and breaking, and slaying and routing the foe,
and hurling them on the hostile ranks, and terrifying them therewith,
came Ghatotkacha, desirous of getting at Drona. The Rakshasa Alambusha,
however, excited with rage, encountered him with diverse weapons and
diverse accoutrements of war. And the battle that took place between
those two foremost of Rakshasas resembled that which took place in days
of old between Samvara and the chief of the celestials. Thus blessed be
thou, took place hundreds of single combats between car-warriors and
elephants, and steeds and foot-soldiers of thy army and theirs in the
midst of the dreadful general engagement. Indeed, such a battle was never
seen or heard of before as that which then took place between those
warriors that were bent upon Drona's destruction and protection. Indeed,
many were the encounters that were then seen on all parts of field, some
of which were terrible, some beautiful, and some exceedingly fierce, O
lord.'"
