SECTION LXIII
"Narada said, 'Yayati, the son of Nahusha, O Srinjaya, we hear, fell a
prey to death. Having performed a hundred Rajasuyas, a hundred
Horse-sacrifices, a thousand Pundarikas, a hundred Vajapeyas, a thousand
Atiratras, innumerable Chaturmasyas, diverse Agnishtomas, and many other
kinds of sacrifices, in all of which he made profuse gifts unto the
Brahmanas, he gave away unto the Brahmanas, having counted it first, the
whole of the wealth that existed on the earth in the possession of
Mlecchas and other Brahmana-hating people. When the gods and the Asuras
were arrayed for battle, king Yayati aided the gods. Having divided the
earth into four parts, he gave it away unto four persons. Having
performed various sacrifices and virtuously begotten excellent offspring
upon (his wives) Devayani, the daughter of Usanas and Sarmishtha, king
Yayati, who was like unto a celestial, roved through the celestial woods
at his own pleasure, like a second Vasava. Acquainted with all the Vedas,
when, however, he found that he was not satiated with the indulgence of
his passions, he then, with his wives, retired into the forest, saying
this: 'Whatever of paddy and wheat and gold and animals and women there
are on earth, even the whole of these is not sufficient for one man.
Thinking of this, one should cultivate contentment.' Thus abandoning all
his desires, and attaining to contentment, the lord Yayati, installing
(his son) on his throne, retired into the forest. When he died, O
Srinjaya, who was superior to thee in respect of the four cardinal
virtues and who, superior to thee, was much superior to thy son, thou
shouldst not, saying, 'Oh, Swaitya, Oh, Swaitya', grieve for the latter
