SECTION LXXIX
"Sanjaya said, 'Then lord Kesava, of eyes like lotus-petals, having
entered the unrivalled mansion of Arjuna, touched water, and spread (for
Arjuna) on the auspicious and even floor an excellent bed of Kusa blades
that were of the hue of the lapis lazuli. And keeping excellent weapons
around that bed, he adorned it duly with garlands of flowers and fried
paddy, perfumes and other auspicious articles. And after Partha (also)
had touched water, meek and submissive attendants brought the usual
nightly sacrifice to the Three-eyed (Mahadeva). Then Partha, with a
cheerful soul, having smeared Madhava with perfumes and adorned with
floral garlands, presented unto Mahadeva the nightly offering.[131] Then
Govinda, with a faint smile, addressed Partha, saying, 'Blessed be thou,
O Partha, lay thyself down, I leave thee.' Placing door-keepers then, and
also sentinels well-armed, blessed Kesava, followed by (his charioteer)
Daruka, repaired to his own tent. He then laid himself down on his white
bed, and thought of diverse measures to be adopted. And the illustrious
one (Kesava) of eyes like lotus petals, began for Partha's sake, to think
of various means that would dispel (Partha's) grief and anxiety and
enhance his prowess and splendour. Of soul wrapt in yoga, that Supreme
Lord of all, viz., Vishnu of wide-spread fame, who always did what was
agreeable to Jishnu, desirous of benefiting (Arjuna), lapsed into yoga,
and meditation. There was none in the Pandava camp who slept that night.
Wakefulness possessed every one, O monarch. And everybody (in the Pandava
camp) thought of this, viz.,--The high-souled wielder of Gandiva, burning
with grief for the death of his son, hath suddenly vowed the slaughter of
the Sindhus. How, indeed, will that slayer of hostile heroes, that son of
Vasava, that mighty-armed warrior, accomplish his vow? The high-souled
son of Pandu hath, indeed made a most difficult resolve. King Jayadratha
is endued with mighty energy. Oh, let Arjuna succeed in fulfilling his
vow. Difficult is that vow which he, afflicted with grief on account of
his son, hath made. Duryodhana's brothers are all possessed of great
prowess. His forces also are countless. The son of Dhritarashtra hath
assigned all these to Jayadratha (as his protectors). Oh, let Dhananjaya
come back (to the camp), having slain the ruler of the Sindhus in battle.
Vanquishing his foes, let Arjuna accomplish his vow. If he fails to slay
the ruler of the Sindhus tomorrow, he will certainly enter into blazing
fire. Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, will not falsify his oath. If Arjuna
dies, how will the son of Dharma succeed in recovering his kingdom?
Indeed, (Yudhishthira) the son of Pandu hath reposed (all his hopes of)
victory of Arjuna. If we have achieved any (religious) merit, if we have
ever poured libations of clarified butter into fire, let Savyasachin,
aided by the fruits thereof, vanquish all his foes.' Thus talking, O
lord, with one another about the victory (of the morrow), that long
night, O king, of theirs, at last, passed away. In the middle of the
night, Janardana, having awaked, remembered Partha's vow, and addressing
(his charioteer) Daruka, said, 'Arjuna, in grief for the death of his
son, hath vowed. O Daruka, that before tomorrow's sun goes down he will
slay Jayadratha. Hearing of this, Duryodhana will assuredly take counsel
with his counsellors, about how Partha may fail to achieve his object.
His several Akshauhinis of troops will protect Jayadratha. Fully
conversant with the ways of applying all weapons, Drona also, with his
son, will protect him. That matchless hero, the Thousand-eyed (Indra
himself), that crusher of the pride of Daityas and Danavas cannot venture
to slay him in battle who is protected by Drona. I, therefore, will do
that tomorrow by which Arjuna, the son of Kunti, may slay Jayadratha
before the sun sets. My wives, my kinsmen, my relatives, non amongst
these is dearer to me than Arjuna. O Daruka, I shall not be able to cast
my eyes, even for a single moment, on the earth bereft of Arjuna. I tell
thee, the earth shall not be reft to Arjuna. Myself vanquishing them all
with their steeds and elephants by putting forth my strength for the sake
of Arjuna, I will slay them with Karna and Suyodhana. Let the three
worlds tomorrow behold my prowess in great battle, when I put forth my
valour, O Daruka, for Dhananjaya's sake. Tomorrow thousands of kings and
hundreds of princes, with their steeds and cars and elephants, will, O
Daruka, fly away from battle. Thou shalt tomorrow, O Daruka, behold that
army of kings overthrown and crushed with my discus, by myself in wrath
for the sake of the son of Pandu. Tomorrow the (three) worlds with the
gods, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Snakes, and the Rakshasas, will
know me as a (true) friend of Savyasachin. He that hateth him, hateth me.
He that followeth him, followeth me. Thou hast intelligence. Know that
Arjuna is half of myself. When morning comes after the expiry of this
night, thou, O Daruka, equipping my excellent car according to the rules
of military science, must bring it and follow me with it carefully,
placing on it my celestial mace called Kaumodaki, my dart and discus, bow
and arrows, and every other thing necessary. O Suta, making room on the
terrace of my car for my standard and for the heroic Garuda thereon, that
adorns my umbrella, and yoking thereto my foremost of steeds named
Valahaka and Meghapushpa and Saivya and Sugriva, having cased them in
golden mail of the splendour of the sun and fire, and thyself putting on
thy armour, stay on it carefully. Upon hearing the loud and terrible
blast of my conch Panchajanya emitting the shrill Rishava note,[132] thou
wilt come quickly to me. In course of a single day, O Daruka, I shall
dispel the wrath and the diverse woes of my cousin, the son of my
paternal aunt. By every means shall I strive so that Vibhatsu in battle
may slay Jayadratha in the very sight of the Dhartarashtras. O
charioteer, I tell thee that Vibhatsu will certainly succeed in slaying
all these for whose slaughter he will strive.'
"Daruka said, 'He is certain to have victory whose charioteership, O
tiger among men, hath been taken by thee. Whence, indeed, can defeat come
to him? As regards myself, I will do that which thou hast commanded me to
do. This night will bring (on its train) the auspicious morn for Arjuna's
victory.'"
