
SECTION CXVIII
"Janamejaya said, 'O utterer of Brahma, thou hast recited (everything
about) the extraordinary birth among men, of the sons of Dhritarashtra in
consequence of the Rishi's grace. Thou hast also said what their names
are, according to the order of their birth. O Brahmana, I have heard all
these from thee. But tell me now all about the Pandavas. While reciting
the incarnations on earth of the celestial, the Asuras, and the beings of
other classes, thou saidst that the Pandavas were all illustrious and
endued with the prowess of gods, and that they were incarnate portion of
the celestials themselves. I desire, therefore, to hear all about those
beings of extraordinary achievements beginning from the moment of their
birth. O Vaisampayana, recite thou their achievements.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'O king, one day Pandu, while roaming about in the
woods (on the southern slopes of the Himavat) that teemed with deer and
wild animals of fierce disposition, saw a large deer, that seemed to be
the leader of a herd, serving his mate. Beholding the animals, the
monarch pierced them both with five of his sharp and swift arrows winged
with golden feathers. O monarch, that was no deer that Pandu struck at,
but a Rishi's son of great ascetic merit who was enjoying his mate in the
form of a deer. Pierced by Pandu, while engaged in the act of
intercourse, he fell down to the ground, uttering cries that were of a
man and began to weep bitterly.
"The deer then addressed Pandu and said, 'O king, even men that are
slaves to lust and wrath, and void of reason, and ever sinful, never
commit such a cruel act as this. Individual judgment prevaileth not
against the ordinance, the ordinance prevaileth against individual
judgment. The wise never sanction anything discountenanced by the
ordinance. Thou art born, O Bharata, in a race that hath ever been
virtuous. How is it, therefore, that even thou, suffering thyself to be
overpowered by passion and wrath losest thy reason?' Hearing this, Pandu
replied, 'O deer, kings behave in the matter of slaying animals of thy
species exactly as they do in the matter of slaying foes. It behoveth
thee not, therefore, to reprove me thus from ignorance. Animals of thy
species are slain by open or covert means. This, indeed, is the practice
of kings. Then why dost thou reprove me? Formerly, the Rishi Agastya,
while engaged in the performance of a grand sacrifice, chased the deer,
and devoted every deer in the forest unto the gods in general. Thou hast
been slain, pursuant to the usage sanctioned by such precedent. Wherefore
reprovest us then? For his especial sacrifices Agastya performed the homa
with fat of the deer.'
"The deer then said, 'O king, men do not let fly their arrows at their
enemies when the latter are unprepared. But there is a time for doing it
(viz., after declaration of hostilities). Slaughter at such a time is not
censurable.'
"Pandu replied, 'It is well-known that men slay deer by various effective
means without regarding whether the animals are careful or careless.
Therefore, O deer, why dost thou reprove me?'
"The deer then said, 'O, king, I did not blame thee for thy having killed
a deer, or for the injury thou hast done to me. But, instead of acting so
cruelly, thou shouldst have waited till the completion of my act of
intercourse. What man of wisdom and virtue is there that can kill a deer
while engaged in such an act? The time of sexual intercourse is agreeable
to every creature and productive of good to all. O king, with this my
mate I was engaged in the gratification of my sexual desire. But that
effort of mine hath been rendered futile by thee. O king of the Kurus, as
thou art born in the race of the Pauravas ever noted for white (virtuous)
deeds, such an act hath scarcely been worthy of thee. O Bharata, this act
must be regarded as extremely cruel, deserving of universal execration,
infamous, and sinful, and certainly leading to hell. Thou art acquainted
with the pleasures of sexual intercourse. Thou art acquainted also with
the teaching of morality and dictates of duty. Like unto a celestial as
thou art, it behoveth thee not to do such an act as leadeth to hell. O
best of kings, thy duty is to chastise all who act cruelly, who are
engaged in sinful practices and who have thrown to the winds religion,
profit, and pleasure as explained in the scriptures. What hast thou done,
O best of men, in killing me who have given thee no offence? I am, O
king, a Muni who liveth on fruits and roots, though disguised as a deer.
I was living in the woods in peace with all. Yet thou hast killed me, O
king, for which I will curse thee certainly. As thou hast been cruel unto
a couple of opposite sexes, death shall certainly overtake thee as soon
as thou feelest the influence of sexual desire. I am a Muni of the name
of Kindama, possessed of ascetic merit. I was engaged in sexual
intercourse with this deer, because my feelings of modesty did not permit
me to indulge in such an act in human society. In the form of a deer I
rove in the deep woods in the company of other deer. Thou hast slain me
without knowing that I am a Brahmana, the sin of having slain a Brahmana
shall not, therefore, be thine. But senseless man, as you have killed me,
disguised as a deer, at such a time, thy fate shall certainly be even
like mine. When, approaching thy wife lustfully, thou wilt unite with her
even as I had done with mine, in that very state shalt thou have to go to
the world of the spirits. And that wife of thine with whom thou mayst be
united in intercourse at the time of thy death shall also follow thee
with affection and reverence to the domains of the king of the dead. Thou
hast brought me grief when I was happy. So shall grief come to thee when
thou art in happiness.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Saying this, that deer, afflicted with grief
gave up the ghost; and Pandu also was plunged in woe at the sight.'"
