
SECTION CXII
"Vaisampayana said. 'The large-eyed daughter of Kuntibhoja, Pritha by
name, was endued with beauty and every accomplishment. Of rigid vows, she
was devoted to virtue and possessed of every good quality. But though
endued with beauty and youth and every womanly attribute, yet it so
happened that no king asked-for her hand. Her father Kuntibhoja seeing
this, invited, O best of monarchs, the princes and kings of other
countries and desired his daughter to select her husband from among her
guests. The intelligent Kunti, entering the amphitheatre, beheld
Pandu--the foremost of the Bharatas--that tiger among kings--in that
concourse of crowned heads. Proud as the lion, broad-chested, bull-eyed,
endued with great strength, and outshining all other monarchs in
splendour, he looked like another Indra in that royal assemblage. The
amiable daughter of Kuntibhoja, of faultless features, beholding
Pandu--that best of men--in that assembly, became very much agitated. And
advancing with modesty, all the while quivering with emotion, she placed
the nuptial garland about Pandu's neck. The other monarchs, seeing Kunti
choose Pandu for her lord, returned to their respective kingdoms on
elephants, horses and cars, as they had come. Then, O king, the bride's
father caused the nuptial rites to be performed duly. The Kuru prince
blessed with great good fortune and the daughter of Kuntibhoja formed a
couple like Maghavat and Paulomi (the king and queen of the celestials).
And, O best of Kuru monarchs, king Kuntibhoja, after the nuptials were
over, presented his son-in-law with much wealth and sent him back to his
capital. Then the Kuru prince Pandu, accompanied by a large force bearing
various kinds of banners and pennons, and eulogised by Brahmanas and
great Rishis pronouncing benedictions, reached his capital. And after
arriving at his own palace, he established his queen therein.'"
