SECTION CLII
(Ghatotkacha-badha Parva)
"Sanjaya said, 'That elephant force of thine, O king, swelling with
might, fought everywhere, prevailing over the Pandava force. Resolved to
go to the other world, the Panchalas and the Kauravas fought with one
another for admission into the swelling domains of Yama. Brave warriors,
encountering brave rivals, pierced one another with arrows and lances and
darts, and quickly despatched one another unto Yama's abode. Dreadful was
the battle that took place between car-warriors and car-warriors who
struck one another and caused a fierce flow of blood. Infuriated
elephants, encountering infuriated compeers, afflicted one another with
their tusks. Horsemen, solicitous of glory, pierced and cut down horsemen
in that terrific melee with spears and darts and battle-axes.
Foot-soldiers also O mighty-armed one, in hundreds, armed with weapons,
repeatedly rushed against one another with resolute courage, O scorcher
of foes! So great was the confusion that the Panchalas and the Kurus
could only be distinguished from each other by the tribal, the family,
and the personal names we heard them utter. The warriors, despatching one
another to the other world with arrows and darts and axes, careered
fearlessly on the field. With thousands of arrows, however, O king, shot
by the combatants the ten points were no longer illuminated as before in
consequence of the Sun having set. While the Pandavas were thus fighting,
O Bharata, Duryodhana, O king, penetrated into the midst of their host.
Filled with great wrath at the slaughter of the ruler of Sindhus, and
resolved to lay down his life, he penetrated into the hostile army.
Filling the earth with the rattle of his car-wheels and causing her to
tremble therewith, thy son approached the Pandava host. Terrific was the
clash that took place between him and them, O Bharata, causing a
tremendous carnage of troops. Like the sun himself at midday scorching
everything with his rays, thy son scorched the hostile host with his
arrowy showers.[189] The Pandavas became incapable of even looking at
their brother (Duryodhana). Despairing of vanquishing their foes, they
set their hearts on flying away from the field. Slaughtered by thy
illustrious son, armed with the bow, by means of his gold-winged arrows
of blazing points, the Panchalas ran away in all directions. Afflicted
with those keen shafts, the Pandava troops began to fall down on the
ground. Indeed, the Pandavas had never succeeded in achieving such a feat
in battle as was then achieved by thy royal son, O monarch! The Pandava
host was crushed and ground by an elephant.[190] As, again, an assemblage
of lotuses becomes shorn of its beauty when the water (over which it
grows) is dried up by the sun and the wind, even so became the Pandava
host being dried up by thy son, O Bharata, the Panchalas, with Bhimasena
then with ten shafts, and each of the sons of Madri with three, and
Virata and Drupada each with six, and Sikhandin with a hundred, and
Dhrishtadyumna with seventy, and Yudhishthira with seven, and the
Kaikeyas and the Chedis with innumerable keen shafts, and Satwata with
five, and each of the (five) sons of Draupadi with three, and Ghatotkacha
also with a few, he uttered a leonine shout. Cutting off hundreds of
other warriors and the bodies of elephants and steeds in that great
battle by means of his fierce shafts, he behaved like the Destroyer
himself in rage slaying created beings.[191] While engaged, however, in
thus slaughtering his foes, his bow, the back of whose staff was
ornamented with gold, Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, O sire, cut off
into three parts with a pair of broad-headed shafts. And Yudhishthira
pierced Duryodhana himself with ten keen arrows shot with great force.
Piercing through Duryodhana's vital limbs, those passed out and entered
the earth in a continuous line. The troops that stood around then
encompassed Yudhishthira, like the celestials encompassing Purandara for
the slaughter of Vritra. Then king Yudhishthira, O sire, who is incapable
of being easily defeated, shot at thy son in that battle a fierce shaft.
Deeply pierced therewith, Duryodhana sat down on his excellent car. Then
a loud noise arose from among the Panchala troops. Even this, O monarch,
was that tremendous uproar, viz., 'The king is slain!' The fierce whizz
of arrows also was heard there, O Bharata. Then Drona quickly showed
himself there in that battle. Meanwhile, Duryodhana recovering his
senses, had firmly grasped the bow. He then rushed towards the royal son
of Pandu saying, 'Wait, Wait.' Then the Panchalas also solicitous of
victory, began to advance with speed. Desirous of rescuing the Kuru
prince, Drona received them all. And the preceptor began to destroy them
like the bright-rayed maker of day destroying tempest-tossed clouds.
Then, O king, there occurred a fierce battle, fraught with immense
carnage, between thine and theirs encountering one another from desire of
fight.'"
