SECTION LXXV
"Sanjaya said, 'After Partha had vowed the death of the ruler of the
Sindhus, the mighty-armed Vasudeva addressed Dhananjaya and said,--With
the consent of thy brothers (alone, but without consulting me), thou hast
sworn, saying--I will slay the ruler of the Sindhus! This hath been an
act of great rashness (on thy part)! Without consulting me, thou hast
taken up a great weight (upon thy shoulders)! Alas, how shall we escape
the ridicule of all men? I had sent some spies into the camp of
Dhritarashtra's son. Those spies, quickly coming unto me, gave me this
information, viz., that after thou, O lord, hadst vowed to slay the ruler
of the Sindhus, loud leonine shouts, mingled with the sounds of (our)
musical instruments, were heard by the Dhritarashtras. In consequence of
that uproar, the Dhritarashtras, with their well-wishers, became
terrified,--These leonine shouts are not, causeless!--thought they, and
waited (for what would ensue). O thou of mighty arms, an uproarious din
then arose amongst the Kauravas, of their elephants and steeds and
infantry. And a terrible rattle was also heard of their cars.--Having
heard of the death of Abhimanyu, Dhananjaya, deeply afflicted will in
wrath come out in the night for battle!--Than king even thus, they waited
(ready for battle). While preparing themselves. O thou of eyes like
lotus-petals, they then learnt truly the vow about the slaughter of the
ruler of the Sindhus, made by thee that art wedded to truth.[128] Then
all the counsellors of Suyodhana became heartless and frightened like
little animals. As regards king Jayadratha, that ruler of the Sindhus and
the Sauviras, overwhelmed with grief and becoming thoroughly cheerless he
stood up and entered his own tent with all his counsellors. Having
consulted (with them) about every remedy that could benefit him at a time
when he stood in need of consultation, he proceeded to the assembly of
the (allied) kings and there said these words unto Suyodhana--Dhananjaya
thinking me to be the slayer of his son, will tomorrow encounter me in
battle! He hath, in the midst of his army, vowed to stay me! That vow of
Savyasachin the very gods and Gandharvas and Asuras and Uragas and
Rakshasas cannot venture to frustrate! Protect me, therefore, ye all in
battle! Let not Dhananjaya, placing his foot on your head, succeed in
hitting the mark! Let proper arrangements be made in respect of this
matter! Or, if, O delighter of the Kurus, you think that you will not
succeed in protecting me in battle, grant me permission then, O king, so
that I may return home! Thus addressed (by Jayadratha), Suyodhana became
cheerless and sat, hanging down his head. Ascertaining that Jayadratha
was in a great fright, Suyodhana began to reflect in silence. Beholding
the Kuru king to be greatly afflicted, king Jayadratha, the ruler of the
Sindhus, slowly said these words having a beneficial reference to
himself--I do not behold here that bowman of superior energy who can
baffle with his arms the weapons of Arjuna in great battle! Who, even if
it be Satakratu himself, will stay in front of Arjuna having Vasudeva for
his ally, while wielding the bow Gandiva? It is heard that lord Maheswara
himself of supreme energy had been encountered, before this, by Partha on
foot, on the mountains of Himvat! Urged by the chief of the celestials,
he slew on a single car, a thousand Danavas dwelling in Hiranyapura! That
son of Kunti is now allied with Vasudeva of great intelligence. I think
that he is competent to destroy the three worlds including the very gods.
I wish that you will either grant me permission (to leave the field for
my home) or that the high-souled and heroic Drona with his son will
protect me! Or, I would await thy pleasure!--O Arjuna, (thus addressed by
Jayadratha) king Suyodhana humbly beseeched the preceptor in this
matter.[129] All remedial measures have been adopted. Cars and steeds
have been arranged. Karna and Bhurisravas, and Drona's son, and the
invincible Vrishasena, and Kripa, and the ruler of the Madras, these six
will be in (Jayadratha's) van. Drona will form an array half of which
will be a Sakata[130] and half a lotus. In the middle of the leaves of
that lotus will be a needle-mouthed array. Jayadratha, that ruler of the
Sindhus, difficult of being conquered in battle, will take his stand, by
it, protected by heroes! In (the use of) the bow, in weapons, in prowess,
in strength, and also in lineage, those six car-warriors, O Partha are
without doubt, exceedingly difficult of being borne. Without first
vanquishing those six car-warriors, access to Jayadratha will not to be
had. Think, O Arjuna, of the prowess of each of those six, O tiger among
men, when united together, they are not capable of being easily
vanquished! We should, therefore, once again, take counsel with
well-wishing counsellors, conversant with policy, for our benefit and for
the success of our object!'"
