SECTION LXXX
"Sanjaya said, 'Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, of inconceivable prowess
thinking of how to accomplish his vow, recollected the mantras (given to
him by Vyasa). And soon he was lulled in the arms of sleep. Unto that
ape-bannered hero, burning with grief and immersed in thought Kesava,
having Garuda on his banner, appeared in a dream. Dhananjaya of righteous
soul, inconsequence of his love and veneration for Kesava, never omitted
under any circumstances to stand up and advance a few steps for receiving
Krishna. Rising up, therefore, now (in his dream), he gave unto Govinda a
seat. He himself, however, at that time, did not set his heart upon
taking his seat. Then Krishna, of mighty energy, knowing the resolution
of Partha, said, while seated, unto the son of Kunti, these words while
the latter was standing: 'Do not set thy heart, O Partha, on grief. Time
is unconquerable. Time forceth all creatures into the inevitable course.
O foremost of men what for is this grief of thine? Grief should not be
indulged in, O foremost of learned persons! Grief is an impediment to
action. Accomplish that act which should be accomplished. The grief that
maketh a person forgo all efforts is, indeed, O Dhananjaya, an enemy of
that person. A person, by indulging in grief, gladdens his foes and
saddens his friends, while the person is himself weakened. Therefore, it
behoveth thee not to grieve.' Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the
unvanquished Vibhatsu of great learning then said these words of grave
import: 'Grave is the vow that I have made about the slaughter of
Jayadratha. Even tomorrow I shall slay that wicked wretch, that slayer of
my son. Even this hath been my vow, O Kesava! For frustrating my vow,
Jayadratha, protected by all the mighty car-warriors, will be kept in
their rear by the Dhartarashtras. Their force, number, consists, O
Madhava, of remnant, after slaughter, of eleven Akshauhinis of troops,
difficult of being vanquished. Surrounded in battle as he will be by all
of them and by all the great car-warriors, how shall he obtain a sight, O
Krishna, of the wicked rule of the Sindhus? My vow will not be
accomplished, O Kesava! How can a person like me live, having failed to
accomplish his vow? O hero, the non-accomplishment is evident of this (my
vow which to me is a) source of great grief. (At this season of the
year), I tell thee that the sun setteth quickly.' The bird-bannered
Krishna hearing this cause of Partha's grief, touched water and sat with
face turned to the east. And then that hero, of eyes like lotus leaves,
and possessed of great energy, said these words for the benefit of
Pandu's son who had resolved upon the slaughter of the ruler of the
Sindhus, 'O Partha, there is an indestructible, supreme weapon of the
name of Pasupata. With it the god Maheswara slew in battle all the
Daityas! If thou rememberest it now, thou shalt then be able to slay
Jayadratha tomorrow. If it is unknown to thee (now), adore within thy
heart the god having the bull for his mark. Thinking of that god in thy
mind, remember him, O Dhananjaya! Thou art his devotee. Through his grace
thou shalt obtain that rich possession.' Hearing these words of Krishna,
Dhananjaya, having touched water, sat on the earth with concentrated mind
and thought of the god Bhava. After he had thus sat with rapt mind at
that hour called Brahma of auspicious indications, Arjuna saw himself
journeying through the sky with Kesava. And Partha, possessed of the
speed of the mind, seemed to reach, with Kesava, the sacred foot of
Himavat and the Manimat mountain abounding in many brilliant gems and
frequented by Siddhas and Charanas. And the lord Kesava seemed to have
caught hold of his left arm. And he seemed to see many wonderful sights
as he reached (those place). And Arjuna of righteous soul then seemed to
arrive at the White mountain on the north. And then he beheld, in the
pleasure-gardens of Kuvera the beautiful lake decked with lotuses. And he
also saw that foremost of rivers, viz., the Ganga full of water. And then
he arrived at the regions about the Mandara mountains. Those regions were
covered with trees that always bore blossoms and fruits. And they
abounded with stones lying scattered about, that were all transparent
crystal. And they were inhabited by lions and tigers and abounded with
animals of diverse kinds. And they were adorned with many beautiful
retreats of ascetics, echoing with the sweet notes of delightful
warblers. And they resounded also with the songs of Kinnaras. Graced with
many golden and silver peaks, they were illumined with diverse herbs and
plants. And many Mandara trees with their pretty loads of flowers,
adorned them. And then Arjuna reached the mountains called Kala that
looked like a mound of antimony. And then he reached the summit called
Brahmatunga, and then many rivers, and then many inhabited provinces. And
he arrived at Satasinga, and the woods known by the name of Sharyati. And
then he beheld the sacred spot known as the Horse-head, and then the
region of Atharvana. And then he beheld that prince of mountains called
Vrishadansa, and the great Mandara, abounding in Apsaras, and graced with
the presence of the Kinnaras. And roaming on that mountain, Partha, with
Krishna, beheld a spot of earth adorned with excellent fountains, decked
with golden mineral, and possessed of the splendour of the lunar rays,
and having many cities and towns. And he also beheld many seas of
wonderful forms and diverse mines of wealth. And thus going through the
sky and firmament and the earth, he reached the spot called Vishnupada.
And wandering, with Krishna in his company, he came down with great
velocity, like a shaft shot (from a bow). And soon Partha beheld a
blazing mountain whose splendour equalled that of the planets, the
constellations, or fire. And arrived at that mountain, he beheld on its
top, the high-souled god having the bull for his mark, and ever engaged
in ascetic penances, like a thousand suns collected together, and blazing
with his own effulgence. Trident in hand, matted locks on the head, of
snow-white colour, he was robed in bark and skin. Endued with great
energy, his body seemed to be flaming with a thousand eyes. And he was
seated with Parvati and many creatures of brilliant forms (around him).
And his attendants were engaged in singing and playing upon musical
instruments, in laughing and dancing, in moving and stretching their
hands, and In uttering loud shouts. And the place was perfumed with
fragrant odours, and Rishis that worshipped Brahma adored with excellent
hymns of unfading glory, that God who was the protector of all creatures,
and wielded the (great) bow (called Pinaka). Beholding him, Vasudeva of
righteous soul, with Partha, touched the earth with his head, uttering
the eternal words of the Veda. And Krishna adored, with speech, mind,
understanding, and acts, that God who is the first source of the
universe, himself uncreate, the supreme lord of unfading glory: who is
the highest cause of the mind, who is space and the wind, who is the
cause of all the luminous bodies (in the firmament), who is the creator
of the rain, and the supreme, primordial substance of the earth, who is
the object of adoration, with the gods, the Danavas, the Yakshas, and
human beings; who is the supreme Brahma that is seen by Yogins and the
refuge of those acquainted with Shastras, who is the creator of all
mobile and immobile creatures, and their destroyer also; who is the Wrath
that burns everything at the end of the Yuga; who is the supreme soul;
who is the Sakra and Surya, and the origin of all attributes. And Krishna
sought the protection of that Bhava, whom men of knowledge, desirous of
attaining to that which is called the subtle and the spiritual, behold;
that uncreate one is the soul of all causes. And Arjuna repeatedly adored
that Deity, knowing that he was the origin of all creatures and the cause
of the past, the future, and the present. Beholding those two, viz., Nara
and Narayana arrived, Bhava of cheerful soul, smilingly said unto them,
'Welcome are ye, ye foremost of men! Rise up and let the fatigue of your
journey be over. What, O heroes, is the desire in your heart? Let it be
uttered quickly. What is the business that has brought you hither? I will
accomplish it and do what would benefit you. I will grant everything ye
may desire., Hearing those words of the god, they both rose. And then
with joined hands, the faultless Vasudeva and Arjuna, both of great
wisdom, began to gratify that high-souled deity with an excellent hymn.
And Krishna and Arjuna said, 'We bow to Bhava, to Sarva, to Rudra, to the
boon-giving deity. We bow to the lord of all creatures endued with life,
to the god who is always fierce, to him who is called Kapardin! We bow to
Mahadeva, to Bhima, to the Three-eyed, to him who is peace and
contentment. We bow to Isana, to him who is the destroyer of (Daksha's)
sacrifice. Let salutations be to the slayer of Andhaka, to the father of
Kumara, to him who is of blue throat, to him who is the creator.' Let
salutation be to the wielder of Pinaka, to one worthy of the offer of
libations of clarified butter, to him who is truth, to him who is
all-pervading. To him who is unvanquished! To him who is always of blue
locks, to him who is armed with the trident, to him who is of celestial
vision! To him who is Hotri, to him who protects all, to, him who is of
three eyes, to him who is disease, to him whose vital seed fell on fire!
To him who is inconceivable, to him who is the lord of Amvika, to him who
is adored by all the gods! To him who hath the bull for his mark, to him
who is bold, to him who is of matted lock, to him who is a Brahmacharin!
To him who standeth as an ascetic in the water, to him who is devoted to
Brahma, to him who hath never been conquered! To him who is the soul of
the universe, to him who is the creator of the universe, to him who
liveth pervading the whole universe! We bow to thee that art, the object
of the reverence of all, to thee that art the original cause of all
creatures! To thee that art called Brahmachakra, to thee that art called
Sarva, Sankara, and Siva! We bow to thee that art the lord of all great
beings! We bow to thee that hast a thousand heads, to thee that hast a
thousand arms, to thee that art called Death! To thee that hast a
thousand eyes, a thousand legs? To thee whose acts are innumerable! We
bow to thee whose complexion is that of gold, to thee that art cased in
golden mail, to thee that art ever compassionate to thy devotees! O lord,
let our wish be accomplished.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Having adored Mahadeva in these terms, Vasudeva with
Arjuna then began to gratify him for obtaining (the great) weapon (called
Pasupata).'"
