SECTION CLXXII
"Sanjaya said, 'Beholding his own army routed while being slaughtered by
those illustrious heroes, thy son, well-acquainted with words, O monarch,
quickly repairing unto Karna and Drona, that foremost of all victors in
battle, wrathfully said these words, 'This battle has been set on foot by
you two in rage, having seen the ruler of the Sindhus slain by
Savyasachin. You are beholding with indifference the slaughter of my army
by the forces of the Pandavas, although you two are fully competent to
vanquish those forces. If you two now abandon me, you should have, in the
beginning, told me of it, 'We two shall vanquish the sons of Pandu in
battle.' Even these were the words, ye givers of honours, that ye then
said unto me. Hearing these words of yours, I sanctioned these
proceedings. I would never have provoked these hostilities with the
Parthas,--hostilities that are so destructive of heroic combatants (if ye
had told me otherwise). If I do not deserve to be abandoned by you two,
ye bulls among men, then fight according to the true measure of your
prowess, ye heroes endued with great prowess.' Thus pierced by the goad
of speech of thy son, those two heroes once more engaged in battle, like
two snakes vexed with sticks. Then those two foremost of car-warriors,
those two bowmen above all bowmen in the world, rushed with speed against
the Parthas headed by the grandson of Sini and by others. Similarly, the
Parthas uniting together, and accompanied by all their troops, advanced
against those two heroes, who were roaring repeatedly. Then the great
bowman, Drona, that foremost of all wielders of weapons, excited with
rage, quickly pierced (Satyaki), that bull amongst the Sinis, with ten
arrows. And Karna pierced him with ten arrows, and thy son with seven,
and Vrishasena pierced him with ten, and Suvala's son with seven. In that
impervious wall of Kauravas around the grandson of Sini, these also
stationed themselves, encompassing him. Beholding Drona slaughtering the
Pandava army in that battle, the Somakas quickly pierced him from every
side with showers of arrows. Then Drona began to take the lives of
Kshatriyas, O monarch, like the sun destroying darkness around him by his
rays. We then heard, O monarch, a loud uproar amongst the Panchalas, who
called upon one another, while they were being slaughtered by Drona. Some
abandoning sons, some sires, some brothers, some uncles, some their
sister's sons, some their relatives and kinsmen, fled away with speed,
for saving their own lives. Some, again, deprived of their senses, ran
against Drona himself. Indeed, many were the combatants of the Pandava
army that were then despatched to the other world. Thus afflicted by that
illustrious hero, the Pandava host, that night, O king, fled away,
throwing down their blazing torches all around, in the very sight of
Bhimasena and Arjuna and Krishna and the twins and Yudhishthira and
Prishata's son. The world being enveloped in darkness, nothing could be
seen. In consequence of the light that was amongst the Katirava troops,
the flight of the foe could be ascertained. Those mighty car-warriors,
viz., Drona and Karna, O king, pursued the flying host, scattering
numerous shafts. Seeing the Panchalas slaughtered and routed, Janardana
becoming cheerless, said these words unto Phalguna, 'Dhrishtadyumna and
Satyaki, accompanied by the Panchalas, had proceeded against those great
bowmen, viz., Drona and Karna, shooting many shafts. This large host of
ours hath been broken and routed (by them) with showers of arrows. Though
their flight is sought to be checked, they are still incapable of being
rallied, O son of Kunti!--Beholding the host fly away, through fear, ye
Pandava warriors, cast away your fears! Accompanied by all the forces and
arraying then, in good order, both of us, with uplifted weapons, are even
now proceeding against Drona and the Suta's son for withstanding them.'
Then Janardana beholding Vrikodara advancing, once more addressed Arjuna,
the son of Pandu, as if for gladdening him, in these words, 'Yonder
Bhima, who taketh delight in battle, surrounded by the Somakas and the
Pandavas, is coming against those mighty car-warriors, viz., Drona and
Karna. Supported by him, as also by the many mighty car-warriors among
the Pandavas, fight now, O son of Pandu, for assuring all your
troops.'[228] Then those two tigers among men, viz., the son of Pandu and
he of Madhu's race, approaching Drona and Karna, took up their station at
the head of battle.'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Then that vast force of Yudhishthira once more
returned to battle, proceeding to the place where Drona and Karna were
grinding their foes in battle. At dead of night, a fierce encounter took
place, resembling that of two oceans swelling at moon-rise. Then the
warriors of thy army, throwing away from their hands the blazing lamps
held by them, fought with the Pandavas fearlessly and madly. On that
terrible night when the world was enveloped with gloom and dust, the
combatants fought with one another, guided only by the names they
uttered. The names uttered by the kings contending in battle, were heard,
O monarch, there, like what happens, O king, at a Swayamvara or
self-choice. Suddenly, a silence overspread the field of battle, and
lasted for a moment. Then, again, a loud uproar was heard made by the
angry combatants, victors and vanquished. Thither where blazing lamps
were seen, O bull of Kuru's race, thither rushed those heroes like
insects (towards a blazing fire). And as the Pandavas, O king, and the
Kauravas, contended with each other in battle, the darkness of night
thickened around them.'"
