SECTION CIII
"Sanjaya said, 'Thy warriors, as soon as they beheld those foremost of
persons of the Vrishni-Andhaka and the Kuru races, lost no time, each
striving to be first, in proceeding against them from a desire of
slaughtering them. And so Vijaya also rushed against those foes of his.
On their great cars, decked with gold, cased in tiger-skins, producing
deep rattle, and resembling blazing fire, they rushed, illumining the ten
points of the compass, armed, O king, with bows, the backs of whose
staves were decked with gold, and which in consequence of their
splendour, were incapable of being looked at, and uttering loud cries,
and drawn by angry steeds. Bhurisravas, and Sala and Karna, and
Vrishasena, and Jayadratha, and Kripa. and the ruler of the Madras, and
that foremost of car-warriors, viz., the son of Drona. these eight great
car-warriors, as if devouring the skies (as they proceeded) illuminated
the ten points of the compass with their splendid cars, cased in
tiger-skins and decked with golden moons. Clad in mail, filled with wrath
and mounted upon their cars the rattle of which resembled the roar of
masses of clouds, they covered Arjuna on every side with a shower of
sharp shafts. Beautiful steeds of the best breed, endued with great
speed, bearing those great car-warriors, looked resplendent as they
illumined the points of the compass. Their cars drawn by foremost steeds
of great fleetness were of diverse countries and of diverse species, some
bred in mountainous regions, some in rivers, and some in the country of
the Sindhus, many foremost of car-warriors among the Kurus desirous, O
king, of rescuing thy son quickly rushed towards Dhananjaya's car from
every side. Those foremost of men, taking up their conchs blew them,
filling O king, the welkin and the earth with her seas (with that blare).
Then those foremost ones among the gods, viz., Vasudeva and Dhananjaya,
also blew their foremost of conchs on earth. The son of Kunti blew
Devadatta, and Kesava blew Panchajanya. The loud blast of Devadatta, sent
forth by Dhananjaya, filled the earth, the welkin, and ten points of the
compass. And so Panchajanya also blown by Vasudeva, surpassing all
sounds, filled the sky and the earth. And while that awful and fierce
noise continued, a noise that inspired the timid with fear and the brave
with cheers, and while drums and Jharjharas, and cymbals and Mridangas, O
great king, were beat by thousands, great car-warriors invited to the
Kuru side and solicitous of Dhananjaya's welfare, those great bowmen,
filled with rage and unable to bear the loud blast of Arjuna's and
Krishna's conchs, those kings from diverse realms supported by their
respective troops, in rage blew their great conchs, desiring to answer
with their own blasts the blasts of Kesava and Arjuna. The Kuru army
then, urged forward by that blare of conchs, had its car-warriors,
elephants, and steeds filled with anxiety and fear. Indeed, O lord, that
host looked as if they that comprised it were ill. The agitated Kuru
host, echoing with that blare of conchs blown by brave warriors, seemed
to be like the welkin resounding with the noise of thunder and fallen
down (through some convulsion of nature).[146] That loud uproar, O
monarch, resounded through the ten points and frightened that host like
critical incidents at the end of the Yuga frightening all living
creatures. Then, Duryodhana and those eight great car-warriors appointed
for the protection of Jayadratha all surrounded the son of Pandu. The son
of Drona struck Vasudeva with three and seventy shafts, and Arjuna
himself with three broad-headed shafts, and his standard and (four)
steeds with five others. Beholding Janardana pierced, Arjuna, filled with
rage, struck Aswatthaman with hundred shafts. Then piercing Karna with
ten arrows and Vrishasena with three, the valiant Dhananjaya cut off
Salya's bow with arrows fixed on the string, at the handle. Salya then,
taking up another bow, pierced the son of Pandu. And Bhurisravas pierced
him with three arrows whetted on stone, and equipped with golden wings.
And Karna pierced him with two and thirty arrows, and Vrishasena with
seven. And Jayadratha pierced Arjuna with three and seventy shafts and
Kripa pierced him with ten. And the ruler of the Madras also pierced
Phalguna in that battle with ten arrows. And the son of Drona pierced him
with sixty arrows. And he, once more, pierced Partha with five arrows,
and Vasudeva with twenty. Then the tiger among men, viz., Arjuna owning
white steeds and having Krishna for his driver, pierced each of those
warriors in return, displaying the lightness of his hand. Piercing Karna
with a dozen shafts and Vrishasena with three, Partha cut off Salya's bow
at the handle. And piercing the son of Somadatta with three arrows and
Salya with ten, he pierced Kripa with five and twenty arrows, and the
ruler of the Sindhus with a hundred, Partha struck Drona's son with
seventy arrows. Then Bhurisravas filled with rage, cut off the goad in
Krishna's hand, and struck Arjuna with three and twenty shafts. Then
Dhananjaya, of white steeds, filled with rage, mangled those enemies of
his with hundreds upon hundreds of arrows, like a mighty tempest tearing
masses of clouds.'"
