
SECTION CXXVII
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Dhritarashtra then said, 'O Vidura, celebrate
the funeral ceremonies of that lion among kings viz., Pandu, and of Madri
also, in right royal style. For the good of their souls, distribute
cattle, cloths, gems and diverse kinds of wealth, every one receiving as
much as he asketh for. Make arrangements also for Kunti's performing the
last rites of Madri in such a style as pleaseth her. And let Madri's body
be so carefully wrapped up that neither the Sun nor Vayu (god of wind)
may behold it. Lament not for the sinless Pandu. He was a worthy king and
hath left behind him five heroic sons equal unto the celestials
themselves.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Vidura, O Bharata, saying, 'So be it,' in
consultation with Bhishma, fixed upon a sacred spot for the funeral rites
of Pandu. The family priests went out of the city without loss of time,
carrying with them the blazing sacred fire fed with clarified butter and
rendered fragrant therewith. Then friends, relatives, and adherents,
wrapping it up in cloth, decked the body of the monarch with the flowers
of the season and sprinkled various excellent perfumes over it. And they
also decked the hearse itself with garlands and rich hangings. Then
placing the covered body of the king with that of his queen on that
excellent bier decked out so brightly, they caused it to be carried on
human shoulders. With the white umbrella (of state) held over the hearse
with waving yak-tails and sounds of various musical instruments, the
whole scene looked bright and grand. Hundreds of people began to
distribute gems among the crowd on the occasion of the funeral rites of
the king. At length some beautiful robes, and white umbrellas and larger
yak-tails, were brought for the great ceremony. The priests clad in white
walked in the van of the procession pouring libations of clarified butter
on the sacred fire blazing in an ornamental vessel. And Brahmanas, and
Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas, and Sudras by thousands followed the deceased
king, loudly wailing in these accents, 'O prince, where dost thou go,
leaving us behind, and making us forlorn and wretched for ever?' And
Bhishma, and Vidura, and the Pandavas, also all wept aloud. At last they
came to a romantic wood on the banks of the Ganga. There they laid down
the hearse on which the truthful and lion-hearted prince and his spouse
lay. Then they brought water in many golden vessels, washed the prince's
body besmeared before with several kinds of fragrant paste, and again
smeared it over with sandal paste. They then dressed it in a white dress
made of indigenous fabrics. And with the new suit on, the king seemed as
if he was living and only sleeping on a costly bed.
"When the other funeral ceremonies also were finished in consonance with
the directions of the priests, the Kauravas set fire to the dead bodies
of the king and the queen, bringing lotuses, sandal-paste, and other
fragrant substances to the pyre.
"Then seeing the bodies aflame, Kausalya burst out, 'O my son, my
son!'--and fell down senseless on the ground. And seeing her down the
citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces began to wail from grief
and affection for their king. And the birds of the air and the beasts of
the field were touched by the lamentations of Kunti. And Bhishma, the son
of Santanu, and the wise Vidura, and the others also that were there,
became disconsolate.
"Thus weeping, Bhishma, Vidura, Dhritarashtra, the Pandavas and the Kuru
ladies, all performed the watery ceremony of the king. And when all this
was over, the people, themselves filled with sorrow, began to console the
bereaved sons of Pandu. And the Pandavas with their friends began to
sleep on the ground. Seeing this the Brahmanas and the other citizens
also renounced their beds. Young and old, all the citizens grieved on
account of the sons of king Pandu, and passed twelve days in mourning
with the weeping Pandavas.'"
