
SECTION CXXIV
"Vaisampayana said, 'After the birth of Kunti's sons and also of the
hundred sons of Dhritarashtra the daughter of the king of the Madras
privately addressed Pandu, saying, 'O slayer of foes, I have no complaint
even if thou beest unpropitious to me. I have, O sinless one, also no
complaint that though by birth I am superior to Kunti yet I am inferior
to her in station. I do not grieve, O thou of Kuru's race, that Gandhari
hath obtained a hundred sons. This, however, is my great grief that while
Kunti and I are equal, I should be childless, while it should so chance
that thou shouldst have offspring by Kunti alone. If the daughter of
Kuntibhoja should so provide that I should have offspring, she would then
be really doing me a great favour and benefiting thee likewise. She being
my rival, I feel a delicacy in soliciting any favour of her. If thou
beest, O king, propitiously disposed to me, then ask her to grant my
desire.'
"Hearing her, Pandu replied, 'O Madri, I do revolve this matter often in
my own mind, but I have hitherto hesitated to tell thee anything, not
knowing how thou wouldst receive it. Now that I know what your wishes
are, I shall certainly strive after that end. I think that, asked by me,
Kunti will not refuse.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'After this, Pandu addressed Kunti in private,
saying, 'O Kunti, grant me some more offspring for the expansion of my
race and for the benefit of the world. O blessed one, provide thou that I
myself, my ancestors, and thine also, may always have the funeral cake
offered to us. O, do what is beneficial to me, and grant me and the world
what, indeed, is the best of benefits. O, do what, indeed, may be
difficult for thee, moved by the desire of achieving undying fame.
Behold, Indra, even though he hath obtained the sovereignty of the
celestials, doth yet, for fame alone, perform sacrifices. O handsome one,
Brahmanas, well-acquainted with the Vedas, and having achieved high
ascetic merit, do yet, for fame alone, approach their spiritual masters
with reverence. So also all royal sages and Brahmanas possessed of
ascetic wealth have achieved, for fame only, the most difficult of
ascetic feat. Therefore, O blameless one, rescue this Madri as by a raft
(by granting her the means of obtaining offspring), and achieve thou
imperishable fame by making her a mother of children.'
"Thus addressed by her lord, Kunti readily yielded, and said unto Madri,
'Think thou, without loss of time, of some celestial, and thou shall
certainly obtain from him a child like unto him.' Reflecting for a few
moments. Madri thought of the twin Aswins, who coming unto her with speed
begat upon her two sons that were twins named Nakula and Sahadeva,
unrivalled on earth for personal beauty. And as soon as they were born,
an incorporeal voice said, 'In energy and beauty these twins shall
transcend even the twin Aswins themselves.' Indeed possessed of great
energy and beauty, they illumined the whole region.
"O king, after all the children were born the Rishis dwelling on the
mountain of a hundred peaks uttering blessings on them and affectionately
performing the first rites of birth, bestowed appellations on them. The
eldest of Kunti's children was called Yudhishthira, the second Bhimasena,
and the third Arjuna, and of Madri's sons, the first-born of the twins
was called Nakula and the next Sahadeva. And those foremost sons born at
an interval of one year after one another, looked like an embodied period
of five years. And king Pandu, beholding his children of celestial beauty
and of super-abundant energy, great strength and prowess, and of
largeness of soul, rejoiced exceedingly. And the children became great
favourites of the Rishis, as also of their wives, dwelling on the
mountain of a hundred peaks.
"Some time after, Pandu again requested Kunti on behalf of Madri.
Addressed, O king, by her lord in private, Kunti replied, 'Having given
her the formula of invocation only once, she hath, O king, managed to
obtain two sons. Have I not been thus deceived by her, I fear, O king,
that she will soon surpass me in the number of her children. This,
indeed, is the way of all wicked women. Fool that I was, I did not know
that by invoking the twin gods I could obtain at one birth twin children.
I beseech thee, O king, do not command me any further. Let this be the
boon granted (by thee) to me.'
"Thus, O king, were born unto Pandu five sons who were begotten by
celestials and were endued with great strength, and who all lived to
achieve great fame and expand the Kuru race. Each bearing every
auspicious mark on his person, handsome like Soma, proud as the lion,
well-skilled in the use of the bow, and of leonine tread, breast, heart,
eyes, neck and prowess, those foremost of men, resembling the celestials
themselves in might, began to grow up. And beholding them and their
virtues growing with years, the great Rishis dwelling on that snowcapped
sacred mountain were filled with wonder. And the five Pandavas and the
hundred sons of Dhritarashtra--that propagator of the Kuru race--grew up
rapidly like a cluster of lotuses in a lake.'"
