SECTION XLIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'After this king Yudhishthira of magnanimous soul
caused the Sraddha rites to be performed of every one of his kinsmen
slain in battle. King Dhritarashtra also of great fame, gave away, for
the good of his sons in the other world, excellent food, and kine, and
much wealth, and many beautiful and costly gems (unto the Brahmanas).
Yudhishthira accompanied by Draupadi, gave much wealth for the sake of
Drona and the high-souled Karna, of Dhrishtadyumna and Abhimanyu, of the
Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, the son of Hidimva, and of Virata, and his other
well-wishers that had served him loyally, and of Drupada and the five
sons of Draupadi. For the sake of each of these, the king gratified
thousands of Brahmanas with gifts of wealth and gems, and kine and
clothes. The king performed the Sraddha rite for the good in the next
world, of every one of those kings also who had fallen in the battle
without leaving kinsmen or friends behind. And the king also, for the
good of the souls of all his friends, caused houses to be founded for the
distribution of food, and places for the distribution of water, and tanks
to be excavated in their names. Thus paying off the debt he owed to them
and avoiding the chance of censure in the world,[126] the king became
happy and continued to protect his subjects religiously. He showed due
honour, as before, unto Dhritarashtra, and Gandhari, and Vidura, and unto
all the superior Kauravas and unto all the officers. Full of kindness,
the Kuru king honoured and protected all those ladies also who had, in
consequence of the battle, been deprived of their heroic husbands and
sons. The puissant king, with great compassion, extended his favours to
the destitute and the blind and the helpless by giving them food, clothes
and shelter. Freed from foes and having conquered the whole Earth, king
Yudhishthira began to enjoy great happiness.'"
