
SECTION CXX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Pandu, possessed of great energy, then devoted
himself to asceticism. Within a short time he became the favourite of the
whole body of the Siddhas and Charanas residing there. And, O Bharata,
devoted to the service of his spiritual masters, free from vanity, with
mind under complete control and the passions fully subdued, the prince,
becoming competent to enter heaven by his own energy, attained to great
(ascetic) prowess. Some of the Rishis would call him brother, some
friend, while others cherished him as their son. And, O bull of Bharata's
race, having acquired after a long time great ascetic merit coupled with
complete singleness, Pandu became even like a Brahmarshi (though he was a
Kshatriya by birth).
"On a certain day of the new moon, the great Rishis of rigid vows
assembled together, and desirous of beholding Brahman were on the point
of starting on their expedition. Seeing them about to start, Pandu asked
those ascetics, saying, 'Ye first of eloquent men, where shall we go?'
The Rishis answered, 'There will be a great gathering today, in the abode
of Brahman, of celestials, Rishis and Pitris. Desirous of beholding the
Self-create we shall go there today.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing this, Pandu rose up suddenly, desirous
of visiting heaven along with the great Rishis. Accompanied by his two
wives, when he was on the point of following the Rishis in the northerly
direction from the mountain of hundred peaks, those ascetics addressed
him saying, 'In our northward march, while gradually ascending the king
of mountains, we have seen on its delightful breast many regions
inaccessible to ordinary mortals; retreats also of the gods, and
Gandharvas and Apsaras, with palatial mansions by hundreds clustering
thick around and resounding with the sweet notes of celestial music, the
gardens of Kuvera laid out on even and uneven grounds, banks of mighty
rivers, and deep caverns. There are many regions also on those heights
that are covered with perpetual snow and are utterly destitute of
vegetable and animal existence. In some places the downpour of rain is so
heavy that they are perfectly inaccessible and incapable of being
utilised for habitation. Not to speak of other animals, even winged
creatures cannot cross them. The only thing that can go there is air, and
the only beings, Siddhas and great Rishis. How shall these princesses
ascend those heights of the king of mountains? Unaccustomed to pain,
shall they not droop in affliction? Therefore, come not with us, O bull
of Bharata's race!'
"Pandu replied, 'Ye fortunate ones, it is said that for the sonless there
is no admittance into heaven. I am sonless! I In affliction I speak' unto
you! I am afflicted because I have not been able to discharge the debt I
owe to my ancestors. It is certain that with the dissolution of this my
body my ancestors perish! Men are born on this earth with four debts,
viz. those due unto the (deceased) ancestors, the gods, the Rishis, and
other men. In justice these must be discharged. The wise have declared
that no regions of bliss exist for them that neglect to pay these debts
in due time. The gods are paid (gratified) by sacrifices, the Rishis, by
study, meditation, and asceticism, the (deceased) ancestors, by begetting
children and offering the funeral cake, and, lastly other men, by leading
a humane and inoffensive life. I have justly discharged my obligations to
the Rishis, the gods, and other men. But those others than these three
are sure to perish with the dissolution of my body! Ye ascetics, I am not
yet freed from the debt I owe to my (deceased) ancestors. The best of men
are born in this world to beget children for discharging that debt. I
would ask you, should children be begotten in my soil (upon my wives) as
I myself was begotten in the soil of my father by the eminent Rishi?'
"The Rishis said, 'O king of virtuous soul, there is progeny in store for
thee, that is sinless and blest with good fortune and like unto the gods.
We behold it all with our prophetic eyes. Therefore, O tiger among men,
accomplish by your own acts that which destiny pointeth at. Men of
intelligence, acting with deliberation, always obtain good fruits; it
behoveth thee, therefore, O king, to exert thyself. The fruits thou
wouldst obtain are distinctly visible. Thou wouldst really obtain
accomplished and agreeable progeny.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of the ascetics, Pandu,
remembering the loss of his procreative powers owing to the curse of the
deer, began to reflect deeply. And calling his wedded wife the excellent
Kunti, unto him, he told her in private, 'Strive thou to raise offspring
at this time of distress. The wise expounders of the eternal religion
declare that a son, O Kunti, is the cause of virtuous fame in the three
worlds. It is said that sacrifices, charitable gifts, ascetic penances,
and vows observed most carefully, do not confer religious merit on a
sonless man. O thou of sweet smiles, knowing all this, I am certain that
as I am sonless, I shall not obtain regions of true felicity. O timid
one, wretch that I was and addicted to cruel deeds, as a consequence of
the polluted life I led, my power of procreation hath been destroyed by
the curse of the deer. The religious institutes mention six kinds of sons
that are heirs and kinsmen, and six other kinds that are not heirs but
kinsmen. I shall speak of them presently. O Pritha, listen to me. They
are: 1st, the son begotten by one's own self upon his wedded wife; 2nd,
the son begotten upon one's wife by an accomplished person from motives
of kindness; 3rd, the son begotten upon one's wife by a person for
pecuniary consideration; 4th, the son begotten upon the wife after the
husband's death; 5th, the maiden-born son; 6th, the son born of an
unchaste wife; 7th, the son given; 8th, the son bought for a
consideration; 9th, the son self-given; 10th, the son received with a
pregnant bride; 11th, the brother's son; and 12th, the son begotten upon
a wife of lower caste. On failure of offspring of a prior class, the
mother should desire to have offspring of the next class. In times of
distress, men solicit offspring from accomplished younger brothers. The
self-born Manu hath said that men failing to have legitimate offspring of
their own may have offspring begotten upon their wives by others, for
sons confer the highest religious merit. Therefore, O Kunti, being
destitute myself of the power of procreation, I command thee to raise
good offspring through some person who is either equal or superior to me.
O Kunti, listen to the history of the daughter of Saradandayana who was
appointed by her lord to raise offspring. That warrior-dame, when her
monthly season arrived, bathed duly and in the night went out and waited
on a spot where four roads met. She did not wait long when a Brahmana
crowned with ascetic success came there. The daughter of Saradandayana
solicited him for offspring. After pouring libations of clarified butter
on the fire (in the performance of the sacrifice known by the name of
Punsavana) she brought forth three sons that were mighty car-warriors and
of whom Durjaya was the eldest, begotten upon her by that Brahmana. O
thou of good fortune, do thou follow that warrior-dame's example at my
command, and speedily raise offspring out of the seed of some Brahmana of
high ascetic merit.'"
