SECTION XXXIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Sons and grandsons and brothers and sires and
fathers-in-law and preceptors and maternal uncles and grandsires, many
high-souled Kshatriyas, many relatives (by marriage), friends,
companions, sister's sons, and kinsmen, O grandsire, and many foremost of
men coming from diverse countries, have fallen. All these, O grandsire,
have been caused to be slain by myself alone, from desire of kingdom.
Having caused so many heroic kings who were always devoted to
righteousness and all of whom had quaffed Soma in sacrifices, what end
shall I attain, O great ascetic! Thinking that this earth has been bereft
of many lions among kings, all of whom were in the enjoyment of great
prosperity, I burn continually to this day. Having witnessed this
slaughter of kinsmen and millions of other men, I burn with grief, O
grandsire! Oh, what will be the plight of those foremost of ladies who
have been deprived of sons, of husbands, and of brothers. Reproaching the
Pandavas and the Vrishnis as cruel murderers, those ladies, with
emaciated features and plunged in grief, will throw themselves on the
earth! Not beholding their sires and brothers and husbands and sons,
those ladies, through affliction, casting off their life-breath, will go
to the abode of Yama, O foremost of Brahmanas! I have no doubt of this.
The course of morality is very subtle. It is plain that we shall be
stained with the guilt of slaughtering women for this. Having slain our
kinsmen and friends and thereby committed an inexpiable sin, we shall
have to fall into hell with heads downwards. O best of men, we shall,
therefore, waste our limbs with the austerest of penances. Tell me, O
grandsire, to what mode of life I should betake myself then.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Yudhishthira, the
Island-born Rishi, having reflected keenly for some time, addressed the
son of Pandu as follows:
"Vyasa said, 'Remembering the duties of a Kshatriya, O king, do not give
way to grief. All those Kshatriyas, O bull among Kshatriyas, have fallen
in the observance of their proper duties. In the pursuit of great
prosperity and of great fame on earth, those foremost of men, all of whom
were liable to death,[109] have perished through the influence of Time.
Thou hast not been their slayer, nor this Bhima, nor Arjuna, nor the
twins. It is Time that took away their life-breaths according to the
great law of change. Time hath neither mother, nor father, nor anybody
for whom he is disposed to show any favour. He is the witness of the acts
of all creatures. By him have they been taken away. This battle, O bull
of Bharata's race, was only an occasion ordained by him. He causes
creatures to be slain through the instrumentality of creatures. This is
the manner in which it puts forth its irresistible power. Know that Time
(in his dealings with creatures) is dependent upon the bond of action and
is the witness of all actions good and bad. It is Time that brings about
the fruits, fraught with bliss or woe, of our actions. Think, O
mighty-armed one, of the acts of those Kshatriyas that have fallen. Those
acts were the causes of their destruction and it is in consequence of
them that they have perished. Think also of thy own acts consisting of
observances of vows with restrained soul. And think also how thou hast
been forced by the Supreme Ordainer to do such an act (as the slaughter
of so many human beings). As a weapon made by a smith or carpenter is
under the control of the person that is handling it, and moves as he
moves it, similarly this universe, controlled by actions done in Time,
moves as those actions move it. Seeing that the births and deaths of
creatures take place without any (assignable) cause and in perfect
wantonness, grief and joy are perfectly needless. Although this
entanglement of thy heart is a mere delusion, still, if it pleaseth thee,
O king, perform expiatory rites (for washing thyself free of thy
so-called sin). It is heard, O Partha, that the gods and the Asuras
fought against each other. The Asuras were the elder, and the gods the
younger brothers. Covetous of prosperity, fierce was the battle fought
between them. The fight lasted for two and thirty thousand years. Making
the earth one vast expanse of blood, the gods slew the Daityas and gained
possession of heaven. Having obtained possession of the earth, a (large)
number of Brahmanas, conversant with the Vedas, armed themselves,
stupefied with pride, with the Danavas for giving them help in the fight.
They were known by the name of Salavrika and numbered eight and eighty
thousand. All of them, however, were slain by the gods. Those
wicked-souled persons who desire the extinction of virtue and who set
sinfulness agoing deserve to be slain even as the furious Daityas were
slain by the gods. If by slaying a single individual a family may be
saved, or, if by slaying a single family the whole kingdom may be saved,
such an act of slaughter will not be a transgression. Sin, O king,
sometimes assumes the form of virtue, and virtue sometimes assumes the
form of sin. They, however, that are learned, know which is which.
Therefore, console thyself, O son of Pandu, for thou art well versed in
the scriptures. Thou hast, O Bharata, only followed the path formerly
trodden by the very gods. Men like yourselves never go to hell, O bull of
Pandu's race! Comfort these thy brothers and all thy friends, O scorcher
of foes! He who deliberately engages himself in sinful acts, and
committing sinful acts feels no shame but continues the same as before,
is called (in the scripture) a great sinner. There is no expiation for
him and his sins know no diminution. Thou art born in noble race. Forced
by the faults of others, thou hast most unwillingly done this, and having
done this thou repentest of it. The Horse-sacrifice, that grand rite, has
been indicated as an expiation for thee. Make preparations for that
sacrifice, O monarch, and thou shalt be freed from thy sins. The divine
chastiser of Paka, having vanquished his foes with the assistance of the
Maruts, gradually performed a hundred sacrifices and became
Satakratu.[110] Freed from sin, possessed of heaven, and having obtained
many regions of bliss and great happiness and prosperity, Sakra,
surrounded by the Maruts, is shining in beauty, and illuminating all the
quarters with his splendour. The lord of Sachi is adored in the heavens
by the Apsaras. The Rishis and the other gods all worship him with
reverence. Thou hast got the earth through thy prowess. All the kings
have been vanquished by thee, O sinless one, through thy prowess.
Proceeding with thy friends to their kingdom, O king, install their
brothers, sons, or grandsons on their thrones. Behaving with kindness
towards even the children in the womb, make thy subjects glad and happy,
and rule the earth. Install on their thrones the daughters of those that
have no sons. Women are fond of pleasure and power. Through this means
they will castoff their sorrows and become happy. Having comforted the
whole empire in this way, O Bharata, adore the gods in a Horse-sacrifice
as the virtuous Indra did in days of old. It is not proper for us to
grieve for those high-souled Kshatriyas, O bull of thy order (that have
fallen in battle). Stupefied by the power of the destroyer, they have
perished in the observance of the duties of their own order. Thou hast
discharged the duties of a Kshatriya and obtained the earth without a
thorn in it. Observe thy own duties, O son of Kunti, for then, O Bharata,
thou shalt be able to obtain happiness in the other world.'"
