SECTION VI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having said these words, the celestial Rishi Narada
became silent. The royal sage Yudhishthira, filled with grief, became
plunged in meditation. Beholding that hero cheerless and unmanned by
sorrow, sighing like a snake and shedding copious tears, Kunti, herself
filled with grief and almost deprived of her senses by sorrow, addressed
him in these sweet words of grave import and well-suited to the occasion,
'O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, it behoveth thee not to give way to sorrow
thus. O thou of great wisdom, kill this grief of thine, and listen to
what I say. I tried in past times to apprise Karna of his brothership
with thee. The god Surya also, O foremost of all righteous persons, did
the same. All that a well-wishing friend, from desire of good, should say
unto one, was said unto Karna by that god in a dream and once more in my
presence. Neither by affliction nor by reasons could Surya or myself
succeed in pacifying him or inducing him to unite himself with thee.
Succumbing to the influence of Time, he became resolved upon wreaking his
enmity on thee. As he was bent upon doing injuries upon you all, I myself
gave up the attempt.' Thus addressed by his mother, king Yudhishthira,
with tearful eyes and heart agitated by grief, said these words, 'In
consequence of thyself having concealed thy counsels, this great
affliction has overtaken me!' Possessed of great energy, the righteous
king, then, in sorrow, cursed all the women of the world, saying,
'Henceforth no woman shall succeed in keeping a secret.' The king, then,
recollecting his sons and grandsons and kinsmen and friends, became
filled with anxiety and grief. Afflicted with sorrow, the intelligent
king, resembling a fire covered with smoke, became overwhelmed with
despair."
