SECTION IV
"Narada said, 'Having thus obtained weapons from him of Bhrigu's race,
Karna began to pass his days in great joy, in the company of Duryodhana,
O bull of Bharata's race! Once on a time, O monarch, many kings repaired
to a self-choice at the capital of Chitrangada, the ruler of the country
of the Kalingas. The city, O Bharata, full of opulence, was known by the
name of Rajapura. Hundreds of rulers repaired thither for obtaining the
hand of the maiden. Hearing that diverse kings had assembled there,
Duryodhana. also, on his golden car, proceeded thither, accompanied by
Karna. When the festivities commenced in that self-choice, diverse
rulers, O best of kings, came thither for the hand of the maiden. There
were amongst them Sisupala and Jarasandha and Bhishmaka and Vakra, and
Kapotaroman and Nila and Rukmi of steady prowess, and Sringa who was
ruler of the kingdom females, and Asoka and Satadhanwan and the heroic
ruler of the Bhojas. Besides these, many others who dwelt in the
countries of the South, and many preceptors (in arms) of the mlechcha
tribes, and many rulers from the East and the North, O Bharata, came
there. All of them were adorned with golden Angadas, and possessed of the
splendour of pure gold. Of effulgent bodies, they were like tigers of
fierce might. After all those kings had taken their seats, O Bharata, the
maiden entered the arena, accompanied by her nurse and a guard of
eunuchs. Whilst being informed of the names of the kings (as she made her
round), that maiden of the fairest complexion passed by the son of
Dhritarashtra (as she had passed others before him). Duryodhana, however,
of Kuru's race, could not tolerate that rejection of himself.
Disregarding all the kings, he commanded the maiden to stop. Intoxicated
with the pride of energy, and relying upon Bhishma and Drona, king
Duryodhana, taking up that maiden on his car, abducted her with force.
Armed with sword, clad in mail, and his fingers cased in leathern fences,
Karna, that foremost of all wielders of weapons riding on his car,
proceeded along Duryodhana's rear. A great uproar then took place among
the kings, all of whom were actuated by the desire for fight, 'Put on
your coats of mail! Let the cars be made ready!' (These were the sounds
that were heard). Filled with wrath, they pursued Karna and Duryodhana,
showering their arrows upon them like masses of clouds pouring rain upon
a couple of hills. As they thus pursued them, Karna felled their bows and
arrows on the ground, each with a single arrow. Amongst them some became
bowless, some rushed bow in hand, some were on the point of shooting
their shafts, and some pursued them, armed with darts and maces.
Possessed of great lightness of hands, Karna, that foremost of all
smiters, afflicted them all. He deprived many kings of their drivers and
thus vanquished all those lords of earth. They then themselves took up
the reins of their steeds, and saying, 'Go away, go away', turned away
from the battle with cheerless hearts. Protected by Karna, Duryodhana
also came away, with a joyous heart, bringing with him the maiden to the
city called after the elephant.'"
