SECTION XLIX
Vaisampayana said, "Then Hrishikesa and king Yudhishthira, and all those
persons headed by Kripa, and the four Pandavas, riding on those cars
looking like fortified cities and decked with standards and banners,
speedily proceeded to Kurukshetra with the aid of their fleet steeds.
They descended on that field which was covered with hair and marrow and
bones and where millions of high-souled Kshatriyas had cast away their
bodies. It abounded also with many a hill formed of the bodies and bones
of elephants and steeds, and human heads and skulls lay stretched over it
like conch-shells. Variegated with thousands of funeral pyres and teeming
with heaps of armour and weapons, the vast plain looked like the drinking
garden of the Destroyer himself used and abandoned recently. The mighty
car-warriors quickly proceeded, viewing the field of battle haunted by
crowds of spirits and thronged with Rakshasas. While proceeding, the
mighty-armed Kesava, that delighter of all the Yadavas, spoke unto
Yudhishthira about the prowess of Jamadagni's son, 'Yonder, at a
distance, O Partha, are seen the five lakes of Rama! There Rama offered
oblations of Kshatriya blood unto the manes of his ancestors. It was
hither that the puissant Rama, having freed the earth of Kshatriya for
thrice seven times, gave up his task."
"Yudhishthira said,--'I have great doubts in what thou sayest about
Rama's having thrice seven times exterminated the Kshatriyas in days of
old. When the very Kshatriya seed was burnt by Rama, O bull among the
Yadus, how was the Kshatriya order revived, O thou of immeasurable
prowess? How, O bull of the Yadus, was the Kshatriya order exterminated
by the illustrious and high-souled Rama, and how did it again grow? In
frightful car-encounters millions of Kshatriyas were slain. The earth, O
foremost of eloquent men, was strewn with the corpses of Kshatriyas. For
what reason was the Kshatriya order thus exterminated in days of yore by
Rama, the high-souled descendant of Bhrigu, O tiger among the Yadus? O
thou of Vrishni's race, remove this doubt of mine, O bird-bannered hero!
O Krishna, O younger brother of Baladeva, the highest knowledge is from
thee.'"
Vaisampayana said,--"The puissant elder brother of Gada then narrated
unto Yudhishthira of incomparable prowess everything that happened, in
full detail, as to how the earth had become filled with Kshatriyas."
thee.'"
