
SECTION CXXV
"Vaisampayana said, "Beholding his five handsome sons growing up before
him in that great forest on the charming mountain slope, Pandu felt the
last might of his arms revive once more. One day in the season of spring
which maddens every creature the king accompanied by his wife (Madri),
began to rove in the woods where every tree had put forth new blossoms.
He beheld all around Palasas and Tilakas and Mangoes and Champakas and
Parihadrakas and Karnikaras, Asokas and Kesaras and Atimuktas and
Kuruvakas with swarms of maddened bees sweetly humming about. And there
were flowers of blossoming Parijatas with the Kokilas pouring forth their
melodies from under every twig echoing with the sweet hums of the black
bees. And he beheld also various other kinds of trees bent down with the
weight of their flowers and fruits. And there were also many fine pools
of water overgrown with hundreds of fragrant lotuses. Beholding all
these, Pandu felt the soft influence of desire. Roving like a celestial
with a light heart amidst such scenery, Pandu was alone with his wife
Madri in semi-transparent attire. And beholding the youthful Madri thus
attired, the king's desire flamed up like a forest-fire. And ill-able to
suppress his desire thus kindled at the sight of his wife of eyes like
lotus-petals, he was completely overpowered. The king then seized her
against her will, but Madri trembling in fear resisted him to the best of
her might. Consumed by desire, he forgot everything about his misfortune.
And, O thou of Kuru's race unrestrained by the fear of (the Rishi's)
curse and impelled by fate, the monarch, overpowered by passion, forcibly
sought the embraces of Madri, as if he wished to put an end to his own
life. His reason, thus beguiled by the great Destroyer himself by
intoxicating his senses, was itself lost with his life. And the Kuru king
Pandu, of virtuous soul, thus succumbed to the inevitable influence of
Time, while united in intercourse with his wife.
"Then Madri, clasping the body of her senseless lord, began to weep
aloud. And Kunti with her sons and the twins of Madri, hearing those
cries of grief, came to the spot where the king lay in that state. Then,
O king, Madri addressing Kunti in a piteous voice, said, 'Come hither
alone, O Kunti, and let the children stay there.' Hearing these words,
Kunti, bidding the children stay, ran with speed, exclaiming, 'Woe to
me!' And beholding both Pandu and Madri lying prostrate on the ground she
went in grief and affliction, saying, 'Of passions under complete
control, this hero, O Madri, had all along been watched by me with care.
How did he then forgetting the Rishi's curse, approach thee with
enkindled desire? O Madri, this foremost of men should have been
protected by thee. Why didst thou tempt him into solitude? Always
melancholy at the thought of the Rishi's curse, how came he to be merry
with thee in solitude? O princess of Valhika, more fortunate than myself,
thou art really to be envied, for thou hast seen the face of our lord
suffused with gladness and joy.'
"Madri then replied, saying, 'Revered sister, with tears in my eyes, I
resisted the king, but he could not control himself, bent on, as it were
making the Rishi's curse true.'
"Kunti then said, 'I am the older of his wedded wives; the chief
religious merit must be mine. Therefore, O Madri, prevent me not from
achieving that which must be achieved. I must follow our lord to the
region of the dead. Rise up, O Madri, and yield me his body. Rear thou
these children.' Madri replied, saying, 'I do clasp our lord yet, and
have not allowed him to depart; therefore, I shall follow him. My
appetite hath not been appeased. Thou art my older sister, O let me have
thy sanction. This foremost one of the Bharata princes had approached me,
desiring to have intercourse. His appetite unsatiated, shall I not follow
him in the region of Yama to gratify him? O revered one, if I survive
thee, it is certain I shall not be able to rear thy children as if they
were mine. Will not sin touch me on that account? But, thou, O Kunti,
shall be able to bring my sons up as if they were thine. The king, in
seeking me wishfully, hath gone to the region of spirits; therefore, my
body should be burnt with his. O revered sister, withhold not thy
sanction to this which is agreeable to me. Thou wilt certainly bring up
the children carefully. That indeed, would be very agreeable to me. I
have no other direction to give!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said this, the daughter of the king of
Madras, the wedded wife of Pandu, ascended the funeral pyre of her lord,
that bull among men.'"
