
SECTION CXXI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed, Kunti replied unto her heroic lord,
king Pandu, that bull amongst the Kurus, saying, 'O virtuous one, it
behoveth thee not to say so unto me. I am, O thou lotus-eyed one, thy
wedded wife, devoted to thee. O, Bharata of mighty arms, thyself shalt,
in righteousness, beget upon me children endued with great energy. Then I
shall ascend to heaven with thee; O prince of Kuru's race, receive me in
thy embrace for begetting children. I shall not certainly, even in
imagination, accept any other man except thee in my embraces. What other
man is there in this world superior to thee? O virtuous one, listen to
this Pauranic narrative that hath been, O thou of large eyes, heard by
me, and that I shall presently narrate.
"There was, in ancient times, a king in the race of Puru, known by the
name of Vyushitaswa. He was devoted to truth and virtue. Of virtuous soul
and mighty arms, on one occasion, while he was performing a sacrifice the
gods with Indra and the great Rishis came to him, and Indra was so
intoxicated with the Soma juice he drank and the Brahmanas with the large
presents they received, that both the gods and the great Rishis began
themselves to perform everything appertaining to that sacrifice of the
illustrious royal sage. And thereupon Vyushitaswa began to shine above
all men like the Sun appearing in double splendour after the season of
frost is over. And the powerful Vyushitaswa, who was endued with the
strength of ten elephants very soon performed the horse-sacrifice,
overthrowing, O best of monarchs, all the kings of the East, the North,
the West and the South, and exacted tributes from them all. There is an
anecdote, O best of the Kurus, that is sung by all reciters of the
Puranas, in connection with that first of all men, the illustrious
Vyushitaswa.--Having conquered the whole Earth up to the coast of the
sea, Vyushitaswa protected every class of his subjects as a father does
his own begotten sons.--Performing many great sacrifices he gave away
much wealth to the Brahmanas. After collecting unlimited jewels and
precious stones he made arrangements for performing still greater ones.
And he performed also the Agnishtoma, and other special Vedic sacrifices,
extracting great quantities of Soma juice. And, O king, Vyushitaswa had
for his dear wife, Bhadra, the daughter of Kakshivat, unrivalled for
beauty on earth. And it hath been heard by us that the couple loved each
other deeply. King Vyushitaswa was seldom separated from his wife. Sexual
excess, however, brought on an attack of phthisis and the king died
within a few days, sinking like the Sun in his glory. Then Bhadra, his
beautiful queen, was plunged into woe, and as she was sonless, O tiger
among men, she wept in great affliction. Listen to me, O king, as I
narrate to you all that Bhadra said with bitter tears trickling down her
cheeks. 'O virtuous one', she said, 'Women serve no purpose when their
husbands are dead. She who liveth after her husband is dead, draggeth on
a miserable existence that can hardly be called life. O bull of the
Kshatriya order, death is a blessing to women without husbands. I wish to
follow the way thou hast gone. Be kind and take me with thee. In thy
absence, I am unable to bear life even for a moment. Be kind to me, O
king and take me hence pretty soon. O tiger among men, I shall follow
thee over the even and uneven ground. Thou hast gone away, O lord, never
to return. I shall follow thee, O king, as thy own shadow. O tiger among
men, I will obey thee (as thy slave) and will ever do what is agreeable
to thee and what is for thy good. O thou of eyes like lotus-petals,
without thee, from this day, mental agonies will overwhelm me and eat
into my heart. A wretch that I am, some loving couple had doubtless been
separated by me in a former life, for which, in this life, I am made to
suffer the pangs of separation from thee. O king, that wretched woman who
liveth even for a moment separated from her lord, liveth in woe and
suffereth the pangs of hell even here. Some loving couple had doubtless
been separated by me in a former life, for which sinful act I am
suffering this torture arising from my separation from thee. O king, from
this day I will lay myself down on a bed of Kusa grass and abstain from
every luxury, hoping to behold thee once more. O tiger among men, show
thyself to me. O king, O lord, command once more thy wretched and
bitterly weeping wife plunged in woe.'
"Kunti continued, 'It was thus, O Pandu, that the beautiful Bhadra wept
over the death of her lord. And the weeping Bhadra clasped in her arms
the corpse in anguish of heart. Then she was addressed by an incorporeal
voice in these words, "Rise up, O Bhadra, and leave this place. O thou of
sweet smiles, I grant thee this boon. I will beget offspring upon thee.
Lie thou down with me on thy own bed, after the catamenial bath, on the
night of the eighth or the fourteenth day of the moon.' Thus addressed by
the incorporeal voice, the chaste Bhadra did, as she was directed, for
obtaining offspring. And, O bull of the Bharatas, the corpse of her
husband begat upon her seven children viz., three Salwas and four Madras.
O bull of the Bharatas, do thou also beget offspring upon me, like the
illustrious Vyushitaswa, by the exercise of that ascetic power which thou
possessest.'"
