SECTION XIV
Vaisampayana said, "When Kunti's son, king Yudhishthira the just,
remained speechless after listening to his brothers who were telling
these truths of the Vedas, that foremost of women, viz., Draupadi, of
large eyes and great beauty, and noble descent, O monarch, said these
words unto that bull among kings seated in the midst of his brothers that
resembled so many lions and tigers, and like the leader in the midst of a
herd of elephants. Ever expectant of loving regards from all her husbands
but especially from Yudhishthira, she was always treated with affection
and indulgence by the king. Conversant with duties and observant of them
in practice, that lady of large hips, casting her eyes on her lord,
desired his attention in shooting and sweet words and said as follows.
"Draupadi said, These thy brothers, O Partha, are crying and drying their
palates like chatakas but thou dost not gladden them.. O monarch, gladden
these thy brothers, that resemble infuriated elephants (in prowess), with
proper words,--these heroes that have always drunk of the cup of misery.
Why, O king, while living by the side of the Dwaita lake, didst thou say
unto these thy brothers then residing with thee, and suffering from cold
and wind and sun, even these words, viz.,--' rushing to battle from.
desire of victory, we will slay Duryodhana and enjoy the earth that is
capable of granting every wish. Depriving great car-warriors of their
cars and slaying huge elephants, and strewing the field of battle with
the bodies of car-warriors and horsemen and heroes, ye chastisers of
foes, ye will perform great sacrifices of diverse kinds with presents in
profusion. All these sufferings, due to a life of exile in the woods,
will then end in happiness.' O foremost of all practisers of virtue,
having thyself said these words unto thy brothers then, why, O hero, dost
thou depress our hearts now? A eunuch can never enjoy wealth. A eunuch
can never have children even as there can be no fish in a mire (destitute
of water). A Kshatriya without the rod of chastisement can never shine. A
Kshatriya without the rod of chastisement can never enjoy the earth. The
subjects of a king that is without the rod of chastisement can never have
happiness. Friendship for all creatures, charity, study of the Vedas,
penances,--these constitute the duties of a Brahmana and not of a king, O
best of kings! Restraining the wicked, cherishing the honest, and never
retreating from battle,--these are the highest duties of kings. He is
said to be conversant with duties in whom are forgiveness and wrath,
giving and taking, terrors and fearlessness, and chastisement and reward.
It was not by study, or gift, or mendicancy, that thou hast acquired the
earth. That force of the enemy, O hero, ready to burst upon thee with all
its might, abounding with elephants and horse and cars, strong with three
kinds of strength[32] protected by Drona and Karna and Aswatthaman and
Kripa, has been defeated and slain by thee, O hero! It is for this that I
ask thee to enjoy the earth. Formerly, O puissant one, thou hadst, O
monarch, swayed with might,[33] the region called Jambu, O tiger among
men, abounding with populous districts. Thou hadst also, O ruler of men,
swayed with might that other region called Kraunchadwipa situate on the
west of the great Meru and equal unto Jambu-dwipa itself. Thou hadst
swayed with might, O king, that other region called Sakadwipa on the east
of the great Meru and equal to Krauncha-dwipa itself. The region called
Bhadraswa, on the north of the great Meru and equal to Sakadwipa was also
swayed by thee, O tiger, among men! Thou hadst even penetrated the ocean
and swayed with might other regions, too, O hero, and the very islands
begirt by the sea and containing many populous provinces. Having, O
Bharata, achieved such immeasurable feats, and having obtained (through
them) the adorations of the Brahmanas, how is it that thy soul is not
gratified? Seeing these brothers of thine before thee, O Bharata,--these
heroes swelling with might and resembling bulls or infuriated elephants
(in prowess),--why dost thou not address them in delightful words? All of
you are like celestials. All of you are capable of resisting foes. All of
you are competent to scorch your enemies. If only one of you had become
my husband, my happiness would even then have been very great. What need
I say then, O tiger among men, when all of you, numbering five, are my
husbands (and look after me) like the five senses inspiring the physical
frame? The words of my mother-in-law who is possessed of great knowledge
and great foresight, cannot be untrue. Addressing me, she said, 'O
princess of Panchala, Yudhishthira will ever keep you in happiness, O
excellent lady! Having slain many thousands of kings possessed of active
prowess, I see, O monarch, that through thy folly thou art about to make
that feat futile. They whose eldest brother becomes mad, have all to
follow him in madness. Through thy madness, O king, all the Pandavas are
about to become mad. If, O monarch, these thy brothers were in their
senses, they would then have immured thee with all unbelievers (in a
prison) and taken upon themselves the government of the earth. That
person who from dullness of intellect acts in this way never succeeds in
winning prosperity. The man that treads along the path of madness should
be subjected to medical treatment by the aid of incense and collyrium, of
drugs applied through the nose, and of other medicines. O best of the
Bharatas, I am the worst of all my sex, since I desire to live on even
though I am bereaved of my children. Thou shouldst not disregard the
words spoken by me and by these brothers of thine that are endeavouring
thus (to dissuade thee from thy purpose). Indeed, abandoning the whole
earth, thou art inviting adversity and danger to come upon thee. Thou
shinest now, O monarch, even as those two best of kings, viz., Mandhatri
and Amvarisha, regarded by all the lords of earth, did in former days.
Protecting thy subjects righteously, govern the goddess Earth with her
mountains and forests and islands. Do not, O king, become cheerless.
Adore the gods in diverse sacrifices. Fight thy foes. Make gifts of
wealth and clothes and other objects of enjoyment unto the Brahmanas, O
best of kings!'
