SECTION XLVI
"Janamejaya said, 'It behoveth thee, O learned Brahmana, to tell me what
was next done by Yudhishthira the mighty-armed son of Dharma after he had
regained his kingdom. It behoveth thee to tell me also, O Rishi, what the
heroic Hrishikesa, the supreme master of the three worlds did after this.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Listen to me, O king, as I narrate in detail, O
sinless one, what the Pandavas, headed by Vasudeva, did after this.
Having obtained his kingdom, O monarch, Kunti's son Yudhishthira
appointed each of the four orders of men to their respective duties. The
(eldest) son of Pandu gave unto a thousand high-souled Brahmanas of the
Snataka order a thousand Nishkas each. He then gratified the servants
that were dependant on him and the guests that came to him, including
persons that were undeserving and those that held heterodox views, by
fulfilling their wishes. Unto his priest Dhaumya he gave kine in
thousands and much wealth and gold and silver and robes of diverse kinds.
Towards Kripa, O monarch, the king behaved in the way one should towards
one's preceptor. Observant of vows, the king continued to honour Vidura
greatly. That foremost of charitable men gratified all persons with gifts
of food and drink and robes of diverse kinds and beds and seats. Having
restored peace to his kingdom, the king, O best of monarchs, possessed of
great fame, paid due honour unto Yuyutsu and Dhritarashtra. Placing his
kingdom, at the disposal of Dhritarashtra, of Gandhari, and of Vidura,
king Yudhishthira continued to pass his days happily. Having gratified
everybody, including the citizens, in this way, Yudhishthira, O bull of
Bharata's race, then proceeded with joined hands to the presence of the
high-souled Vasudeva. He beheld Krishna, of the hue of a blue cloud,
seated on a large sofa adorned with gold and gems. Attired in yellow
robes of silk and decked with celestial ornaments, his person blazed with
splendour like a Jewel set on gold. His bosom adorned with the Kaustubha
gem, he looked like the Udaya mountain that decked the rising Sun. So
beautiful did he look that there is no simile in the three worlds.
Approaching the high-souled one who was Vishnu himself in incarnate form,
king Yudhishthira addressed him sweetly and smilingly, saying, 'O
foremost of intelligent men, hast thou passed the night happily? O thou
of unfading glory, are all thy faculties in their full vigour? O foremost
of intelligent persons, is it all right with thy understanding? We have
got back our kingdom and the whole earth has come under our control, O
divine lord, through thy grace, O refuge of the three worlds and, O thou
of three steps,[134] through thy grace have we won victory and obtained
great fame and have not fallen away from the duties of our order!' Unto
that chastiser of foes, viz., king Yudhishthira the just who addressed
him in that strain the divine Krishna said not a word, for he was then
rapt in meditation."
