SECTION II
"Vaisampayana said, 'That foremost of speakers, the sage Narada, thus
questioned, narrated everything about the manner in which he who was
believed to be a Suta's son had been cursed (in former days).'
"Narada said, 'It is even so, O mighty armed one, as thou sayest, O
Bharata! Nothing could resist Karna and Arjuna in battle. This, O sinless
one, that I am about to tell thee is unknown to the very gods. Listen to
me, O mighty-armed one, as it befell in former days. How all the
Kshatriyas, cleansed by weapons should attain to regions of bliss, was
the question. For this, a child was conceived by Kunti in her maidenhood,
capable of provoking a general war. Endued with great energy, that child
came to have the status of a Suta. He subsequently acquired the science
of weapons from the preceptor (Drona), that foremost descendant of
Angirasa's race. Thinking of the might of Bhimasena, the quickness of
Arjuna in the use of weapons, the intelligence of thyself, O king, the
humility of the twins, the friendship, from earliest years, between
Vasudeva and the wielder of Gandiva, and the affection of the people for
you all, that young man burnt with envy. In early age he made friends
with king Duryodhana, led by an accident and his own nature and the hate
he bore towards you all. Beholding that Dhananjaya was superior to every
one in the science of weapons, Karna. one day approached Drona in private
and said these words unto him, 'I desire to be acquainted with the Brahma
weapon, with all its mantras and the power of withdrawing it, for I
desire to fight Arjuna. Without doubt, the affection thou bearest to
every one of thy pupils is equal to what thou bearest to thy own son. I
pray that all the masters of the science of weapons may, through thy
grace, regard me as one accomplished in weapons!' Thus addressed by him,
Drona, from partiality for Phalguna, as also from his knowledge of the
wickedness of Karna, said, 'None but a Brahmana, who has duly observed
all vows, should be acquainted with the Brahma weapon, or a Kshatriya
that has practised austere penances, and no other.' When Drona had
answered thus, Karna, having worshipped him, obtained his leave, and
proceeded without delay to Rama then residing on the Mahendra mountains.
Approaching Rama, he bent his head unto him and said, 'I am a Brahmana of
Bhrigu's race.' This procured honour for him. With this knowledge about
his birth and family, Rama received him kindly and said, 'Thou art
welcome!' at which Karna became highly glad. While residing on the
Mahendra mountains that resembled heaven itself, Karna met and mixed with
many Gandharvas, Yakshas, and gods. Residing there he acquired all the
weapons duly, and became a great favourite of the gods, the Gandharvas,
and the Rakshasas. One day he roved on the sea-coast by the side of that
asylum. Indeed, Surya's son, armed with bow and sword, wandered alone,
While thus employed, O Partha, he inadvertently slew, without witting it,
the Homa cow of a certain utterer of Brahma who daily performed his
Agnihotra rite. Knowing that he had perpetrated that act from
inadvertence, he informed the Brahmana of it. Indeed Karna, for the
object of gratifying the owner, repeatedly said, 'O holy one, I have
killed this thy cow without wilting it. Forgive me the act!' Filled with
wrath, the Brahmana, rebuking him, said these words, 'O thou of wicked
conduct, thou deservest to be killed. Let the fruit of this act be thine,
O thou of wicked soul. While fighting him, O wretch whom thou always
challengest, and for whose sake thou strivest so much every day, the
earth shall swallow the wheel of thy car! And while the wheel of thy car
shall thus be swallowed up by the earth, thy foe, putting forth his
prowess, will cut off thy head, thyself being stupefied the while! Leave
me, O vile man! As thou hast heedlessly slain this my cow, even so wilt
thy foe cut off thy head while thou shalt be heedless!' Though cursed,
Karna still sought to gratify that foremost of Brahmanas by offering him
kine and wealth and gems. The latter, however, once more answered him,
'All the words will not succeed in falsifying the words spoken by me! Go
hence or remain, do whatever thou likest.' Thus addressed by the
Brahmana, Karna, hanging down his head from cheerlessness, returned
timidly to Rama, reflecting on that matter.'
