SECTION LIV
"Janamejaya said, 'When that tiger among men, of righteous soul and great
energy, firmly adhering to truth and with passions under complete
control, viz., the son of Santanu and Ganga, named Devavrata or Bhishma
of unfading glory, lay on a hero's bed with the sons of Pandu sitting
around him, tell me, O great sage, what converse ensued in that meeting
of heroes after the slaughter of the troops.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'When Bhishma that chief of the Kurus, lay on his bed
of arrows, many Rishis and Siddhas, O king, headed by Narada, came to
that spot. The unslain remnant of the (assembled) kings with Yudhishthira
at their head, and Dhritarashtra and Krishna and Bhima and Arjuna and the
twins also came there. Those high-souled persons, approaching the
grandsire of the Bharatas who looked like the Sun himself dropped from
the firmament, indulged in lamentations for him. Then Narada of godlike
features reflecting for a short while, addressed all the Pandavas and the
unslain remnant of the kings saying, 'The time, I think, has come for you
to question Bhishma (on subject of morality and religion), for Ganga's
son is about to expire like the Sun that is on the point of setting. He
is about to cast off his life-breaths. Do you all, therefore, solicit him
to discourse to you? He is acquainted with the varied duties of all the
four orders. Old in years, after abandoning his body he will obtain high
regions of bliss. Solicit him, therefore, without delay, to clear the
doubts that exists in your minds.' Thus addressed by Narada, those
princes approached Bhishma, but unable to ask him anything, looked at one
another. Then Yudhishthira the son of Pandu, addressing Hrishikesa said,
"There is no one else than Devaki's son that can question the grandsire.
O foremost one of Yadu's race, do thou, therefore, O slayer of Madhu,
speak first. Thou, O sire, art the foremost of us all and thou art
conversant with every duty and practice." Thus addressed by the son of
Pandu, the illustrious Kesava of unfading glory, approaching the
unconquerable Bhishma, spoke unto him as follows.'
"Vasudeva said, 'Hast thou, O best of kings, passed the night happily?
Has thy understanding become unclouded? Does thy knowledge, O sinless
one, shine in thee by inward light? I hope thy heart no longer feels pain
and thy mind is no longer agitated.'
"Bhishma said, 'Burning, stupefaction, fatigue, exhaustion, illness, and
pain, through thy grace, O thou of Vrishni's race, have all left me in a
single day. O thou of incomparable splendour, all that is past, all that
is future, and all that is present, I behold as clearly as a fruit placed
in my hands. All the duties declared in the Vedas, all those laid down in
the Vedantas, I behold clearly, O thou of unfading glory, in consequence
of the boon thou hast granted to me. The duties that have been declared
by persons of learning and righteous behaviour, dwell in my remembrance.
I am conversant also, O Janardana, with the duties and practices
prevailing in particular countries and among particular tribes and
families. Everything relating again to the four modes of life has come
back to my recollection. I am acquainted also, O Kesava, with the duties
that relate to king-craft. Whatever should at whatever time be said, I
would say, O Janardana! Through thy grace, I have acquired an auspicious
understanding. Strengthened by meditation on thee, feel as if I have
become a young man again. Through thy favour, O Janardana, I have become
competent to discourse on what is beneficial (for the world). Why,
however, O holy one, dost thou not thyself discourse to Pandu's son upon
all that is good? What explanation hast thou to give in respect of this?
Tell me quickly, O Madhava!'
"Vasudeva said, 'Know, O thou of Kuru's race, that I am the root of fame
and of everything that leads to good. All things, good or bad, proceed
from me. Who on earth will wonder if the moon be said to be of cool rays?
Similarly, who will wonder if I were described as one possessed of the
full measure of fame?[159] I have, however, resolved to enhance thy fame,
O thou of great splendour! It is for this, O Bhishma, that I have just
inspired thee with great intelligence. As long, O lord of earth, as the
earth will last, so long will thy fame travel with undiminished lustre
through all the worlds. Whatever, O Bhishma, thou wilt say unto the
inquiring son of Pandu, will be regarded on earth to be as authoritative
as the declarations of that Vedas. That person who will conduct himself
here according to the authority of thy declarations, will obtain
hereafter the reward of every meritorious act. For this reason, O
Bhishma, I have imparted to thee celestial understanding so that thy fame
maybe enhanced on earth. As long as a man's fame lasts in the world, so
long are his achievements said to live. The unslain remnant of the
(assembled) kings are sitting around thee, desirous of listening to thy
discourses on morality and duty. Do thou speak unto them, O Bharata! Thou
art old in years and thy behaviour is consistent with the ordinance of
the Srutis. Thou art well conversant with the duties of kings and with
every other science of duty. No one has ever noticed the slightest
transgression in thee from thy every birth. All the kings know thee to be
conversant with all the sciences of morality and duty. Like a sire unto
his sons do thou, therefore, O king, discourse unto them of high
morality. Thou hast always worshipped the Rishis and the gods. It is
obligatory on thee to discourse on these subjects in detail unto persons
desirous of listening to discourse on morality and duty. A learned
person, especially when solicited by the righteous, should discourse on
the same. The sages have declared this to be a duty. O puissant one, if
thou dost not speak on such subjects, thou wilt incur sin. Therefore,
questioned by thy sons and grandsons, O learned one, about the eternal
duties (of men), do thou, O bull among the Bharatas, discourse upon them
on the subject.'"
