SECTION XL
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Devaki's son Janardana of universal knowledge
addressed king Yudhishthira who stood there with his brothers, saying,
'In this world, O sire, Brahmanas are always the objects of worship with
me. They are gods on earth having poison in their speech, and are
exceedingly easy to gratify. Formerly, in the Krita age, O king, a
Rakshasa of the name of Charvaka, O mighty-armed one, performed austere
penances for many years in Vadari. Brahman repeatedly solicited him to
ask for boons. At last the Rakshasa solicited the boon, O Bharata, of
immunity from fear at the hand of every being in the universe. The Lord
of the universe gave that high boon of immunity from fear at the hands of
all creatures, subject to the only limitation that he should be careful
of how he offended the Brahmanas. Having obtained that boon, the sinful
and mighty Rakshasa of fierce deeds and great prowess began to give pain
to the gods. The gods, persecuted by the might of the Rakshasa,
assembling together, approached Brahman, for compassing their foe's
destruction. The eternal and unchangeable god answered them, O Bharata,
saying, 'I have already arranged the means by which the death of this
Rakshasa may soon be brought about. There will be a king of the name of
Duryodhana. Among men, he will be the friend of this wight. Bound by
affection towards him, the Rakshasa will insult the Brahmanas. Stung by
the wrong he will inflict upon them, the Brahmanas, whose might consists
in speech, will in wrath censure him at which he will meet with
destruction. Even that Rakshasa Charvaka, O foremost of kings, slain by
the curse of the Brahmanas, lies there deprived of life. Do not, O bull
of Bharata's race, give way to grief. The kinsmen, O king, have all
perished in the observance of Kshatriya duties. Those butts among
Kshatriyas, those high-souled heroes, have all gone to heaven. Do thou
attend to thy duties now. O thou of unfading glory, let no grief be
thine. Stay thy foes, protect thy subjects, and worship the Brahmanas.'"
