SECTION CXLVII
"Bhishma said, 'The fowler, seeing the pigeon fall into the fire, became
filled with compassion and once more said, 'Alas, cruel and senseless
that I am, what have I done! I ant certainly a mean wretch! Great will be
my sin for everlasting years! Indulging in such self-reproaches he began
to say, repeatedly, 'I am unworthy of credit. My understanding is wicked.
I am ever sinful in my resolves. Alas, abandoning all kinds of honourable
occupation, I have become a fowler A cruel wretch that I am, without
doubt, this high-souled pigeon, by laying down his own life, has read me
a grave lesson. Abandoning wives and sons, I shall certainly cast off my
very life-breaths that are so dear. The high-souled pigeon has taught me
that duty. From this day, denying every comfort to my body, I shall wear
it out even as a shallow tank in the season of summer. Capable of bearing
hunger, thirst, and penances, reduced to emaciation, and covered with
visible veins all over, I shall, by diverse kinds of practise such vows
as have a reference to the other world. Alas, by giving up his body, the
pigeon has shown the worship that should be paid to a guest. Taught by
his example. I shall henceforth practise righteousness. Righteousness is
the highest refuge (of all creatures). Indeed, I shall practise such
righteousness as has been seen in the righteous pigeon, that foremost of
all winged creatures.' Having formed such a resolution and said these
words, that fowler, once of fierce deeds, proceeded to make an
unreturning tour of the world,[436] observing for the while the most
rigid vows. He threw away his stout staff, his sharp-pointed iron-stick,
his nets and springes, and his iron cage, and set at liberty the
she-pigeon that he had seized and immured.'"
