SECTION XCIV
"Vamadeva said, 'The king should win victories without battles. Victories
achieved by battles are not spoken of highly. O monarch, by the wise.
When the sovereign's own power has not been confirmed, he should not seek
to make new acquisitions. It is not proper that a king whose power has
not been consolidated should seek to make such acquisitions. The power of
that king whose dominions are wide and abound with wealth, whose subjects
are loyal and contented, and who has a large number of officers, is said
to be confirmed. That king whose soldiery are contented, gratified (with
pay and prize), and competent to deceive foes can with even a small force
subjugate the whole earth. The power of that king whose subjects, whether
belonging to the cities or the provinces, have compassion for all
creatures, and possessed of wealth and grain, is said to be confirmed.
When the king thinks that his power is greater than that of a foe, he
should then, aided by his intelligence, seek to acquire the latter's
territories and wealth. A king whose resources are increasing, who is
compassionate unto all creatures, who never loses any time by
procrastination, and who is careful in protecting, his own self, succeeds
in earning advancement. That king who behaves deceitfully towards his own
people that have not been guilty of any fault, shears his own self like a
person cutting down a forest with an axe. If the king does not always
attend to the task of slaying his foes, the latter do not diminish. That
king, again, who knows how to kill his own temper finds no enemies. If
the king be possessed of wisdom, he would never do any act that is
disapproved by good men. He would, on the other hand, always engage
himself in such acts as would lead to his own benefit and that of others.
That king who, having accomplished all his duties, becomes happy in the
approbation of his own conscience, has never to incur the reproach of
others and indulge in regrets. That king who observes such conduct
towards men succeeds in subjugating both the worlds and enjoy the fruits
of victory.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by Vamadeva, king Vasumana did as he
was directed. Without doubt, thyself also, following these counsels,
shalt succeed in conquering both the worlds.'"
