
SECTION CXXXIV
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus worshipped by Bhishma, Drona, that first of
men, endued with great energy, took up his quarters in the abode of the
Kurus and continued to live there, receiving their adorations. After he
had rested a while, Bhishma, taking with him his grandsons, the Kaurava
princes, gave them unto him as pupils, making at the same time many
valuable presents. And the mighty one (Bhishma) also joyfully gave unto
the son of Bharadwaja a house that was tidy and neat and well-filled with
paddy and every kind of wealth. And that first of archers, Drona,
thereupon joyfully, accepted the Kauravas, viz., the sons of Pandu and
Dhritarashtra, as his pupils. And having accepted them all as his pupils,
one day Drona called them apart and making them touch his feet, said to
them with a swelling heart, 'I have in my heart a particular purpose.
Promise me truly, ye sinless ones, that when ye have become skilled in
arms, ye will accomplish it.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words, the Kuru princes remained
silent. But Arjuna, O king, vowed to accomplish it whatever it was. Drona
then cheerfully clasped Arjuna to his bosom and took the scent of his
head repeatedly, shedding tears of joy all the while. Then Drona endued
with great prowess taught the sons of Pandu (the use of) many weapons
both celestial and human. And, O bull of the Bharata race, many other
princes also flocked to that best of Brahmanas for instruction in arms.
The Vrishnis and the Andhakas, and princes from various lands, and the
(adopted) son of Radha of the Suta caste, (Karna), all became pupils of
Drona. But of them all, the Suta child Karna, from jealousy, frequently
defied Arjuna, and supported by Duryodhana, used to disregard the
Pandavas. Arjuna, however, from devotion to the science of arms, always
stayed by the side of his preceptor, and in skill, strength of arms, and
perseverance, excelled all (his class-fellows). Indeed, although the
instruction the preceptor gave, was the same in the case of all, yet in
lightness and skill Arjuna became the foremost of all his fellow-pupils.
And Drona was convinced that none of his pupils would (at any time) be
able to be equal to that son of Indra.
"Thus Drona continued giving lessons to the princes in the science of
weapons. And while he gave unto every one of his pupils a narrow-mouthed
vessel (for fetching water) in order that much time may be spent in
filling them, he gave unto his own son Aswatthaman a broad-mouthed
vessel, so that, filling it quickly, he might return soon enough. And in
the intervals so gained, Drona used to instruct his own son in several
superior methods (of using weapons). Jishnu (Arjuna) came to know of
this, and thereupon filling his narrow-mouthed vessel with water by means
of the Varuna weapon he used to come unto his preceptor at the same time
with his preceptor's son. And accordingly the intelligent son of Pritha,
that foremost of all men possessing a knowledge of weapons, had no
inferiority to his preceptor's son in respect of excellence. Arjuna's
devotion to the service of his preceptor as also to arms was very great
and he soon became the favourite of his preceptor. And Drona, beholding
his pupil's devotion to arms, summoned the cook, and told him in secret,
'Never give Arjuna his food in the dark, nor tell him that I have told
thee this.' A few days after, however, when Arjuna was taking his food, a
wind arose, and thereupon the lamp that had been burning went out. But
Arjuna, endued with energy, continued eating in the dark, his hand, from
habit, going to his mouth. His attention being thus called to the force
of habit, the strong-armed son of Pandu set his heart upon practising
with his bow in the night. And, O Bharata, Drona, hearing the twang of
his bowstring in the night, came to him, and clasping him, said, 'Truly
do I tell thee that I shall do that unto thee by which there shall not be
an archer equal to thee in this world.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thereafter Drona began to teach Arjuna the art
of fighting on horse-back, on the back of elephants, on car, and on the
ground. And the mighty Drona also instructed Arjuna in fighting with the
mace, the sword, the lance, the spear, and the dart. And he also
instructed him in using many weapons and fighting with many men at the
same time. And hearing reports of his skill, kings and princes, desirous
of learning the science of arms, flocked to Drona by thousands. Amongst
those that came there, O monarch, was a prince named Ekalavya, who was
the son of Hiranyadhanus, king of the Nishadas (the lowest of the mixed
orders). Drona, however, cognisant of all rules of morality, accepted not
the prince as his pupil in archery, seeing that he was a Nishada who
might (in time) excel all his high-born pupils. But, O oppressor of all
enemies, the Nishada prince, touching Drona's feet with bent head, wended
his way into the forest, and there he made a clay-image of Drona, and
began to worship it respectfully, as if it was his real preceptor, and
practised weapons before it with the most rigid regularity. In
consequence of his exceptional reverence for his preceptor and his
devotion to his purpose, all the three processes of fixing arrows on the
bowstring, aiming, and letting off became very easy for him.
"And one day, O grinder of foes, the Kuru and the Pandava princes, with
Drona's leave, set out in their cars on a hunting excursion. A servant, O
king, followed the party at leisure, with the usual implements and a dog.
Having come to the woods, they wandered about, intent on the purpose they
had in view. Meanwhile, the dog also, in wandering alone in the woods,
came upon the Nishada prince (Ekalavya). And beholding the Nishada of
dark hue, of body besmeared with filth, dressed in black and bearing
matted locks on head, the dog began to bark aloud.
"Thereupon the Nishada prince, desirous of exhibiting his lightness of
hand, sent seven arrows into its mouth (before it could shut it). The
dog, thus pierced with seven arrows, came back to the Pandavas. Those
heroes, who beheld that sight, were filled with wonder, and, ashamed of
their own skill, began to praise the lightness of hand and precision of
aim by auricular precision (exhibited by the unknown archer). And they
thereupon began to seek in those woods for the unknown dweller therein
that had shown such skill. And, O king, the Pandavas soon found out the
object of their search ceaselessly discharging arrows from the bow. And
beholding that man of grim visage, who was totally a stranger to them,
they asked, 'Who art thou and whose son?' Thus questioned, the man
replied, 'Ye heroes, I am the son of Hiranyadhanus, king of the Nishadas.
Know me also for a pupil of Drona, labouring for the mastery of the art
of arms.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The Pandavas then, having made themselves
acquainted with everything connected with him, returned (to the city),
and going unto Drona, told him of that wonderful feat of archery which
they had witnessed in the woods. Arjuna, in particular, thinking all the
while, O king, Ekalavya, saw Drona in private and relying upon his
preceptor's affection for him, said, 'Thou hadst lovingly told me,
clasping me, to thy bosom, that no pupil of thine should be equal to me.
Why then is there a pupil of thine, the mighty son of the Nishada king,
superior to me?"
'Vaisampayana continued, 'On hearing these words, Drona reflected for a
moment, and resolving upon the course of action he should follow, took
Arjuna with him and went unto the Nishada prince. And he beheld Ekalavya
with body besmeared with filth, matted locks (on head), clad in rags,
bearing a bow in hand and ceaselessly shooting arrows therefrom. And when
Ekalavya saw Drona approaching towards him, he went a few steps forward,
and touched his feet and prostrated himself on the ground. And the son of
the Nishada king worshipping Drona, duly represented himself as his
pupil, and clasping his hands in reverence stood before him (awaiting his
commands). Then Drona, O king, addressed Ekalavya, saying, 'If, O hero,
thou art really my pupil, give me then my fees.' On hearing these words,
Ekalavya was very much gratified, and said in reply, 'O illustrious
preceptor, what shall I give? Command me; for there is nothing, O
foremost of all persons conversant with the Vedas, that I may not give
unto my preceptor.' Drona answered, 'O Ekalavya, if thou art really
intent on making me a gift, I should like then to have the thumb of thy
right hand.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these cruel words of Drona, who had
asked of him his thumb as tuition-fee, Ekalavya, ever devoted to truth
and desirous also of keeping his promise, with a cheerful face and an
unafflicted heart cut off without ado his thumb, and gave it unto Drona.
After this, when the Nishada prince began once more to shoot with the
help of his remaining fingers, he found, O king, that he had lost his
former lightness of hand. And at this Arjuna became happy, the fever (of
jealousy) having left him.
"Two of Drona's pupils became very much accomplished in the use of mace.
These were Druvodhana and Bhima, who were, however, always jealous of
each other. Aswatthaman excelled everyone (in the mysteries of the
science of arms). The twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) excelled everybody in
handling the sword. Yudhishthira surpassed everybody as a car-warrior;
but Arjuna, however, outdistanced everyone in every respect--in
intelligence, resourcefulness, strength and perseverance. Accomplished in
all weapons, Arjuna became the foremost of even the foremost of
car-warriors; and his fame spread all over the earth to the verge of the
sea. And although the instruction was the same, the mighty Arjuna
excelled all (the princes in lightness of hand). Indeed, in weapons as in
devotion to his preceptor, he became the foremost of them all. And
amongst all the princes, Arjuna alone became an Atiratha (a car-warrior
capable of fighting at one time with sixty thousand foes). And the wicked
sons of Dhritarashtra, beholding Bhimasena endued with great strength and
Arjuna accomplished in all arms, became very jealous of them.
"O bull among men, one day Drona desirous of testing the comparative
excellence of all his pupils in the use of arms, collected them all
together after their education had been completed. And before assembling
them together, he had caused an artificial bird, as the would be aim, to
be placed on the top of a neighbouring tree. And when they were all
together, Drona said unto them, 'Take up your bows quickly and stand here
aiming at that bird on the tree, with arrows fixed on your bowstrings;
shoot and cut off the bird's head, as soon as I give the order. I shall
give each of you a turn, one by one, my children.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Drona, that foremost of all Angira's sons
first addressed Yudhishthira saying, 'O irrepressible one, aim with thy
arrow and shoot as soon as I give the order. Yudhishthira took up the bow
first, as desired, O king, by his preceptor, and stood aiming at the
bird. But, O bull of Bharata's race, Drona in an instant, addressing the
Kuru prince standing with bow in hand, said, 'Behold, O prince, that bird
on top of the tree.' Yudhishthira replied unto his preceptor, saying, 'I
do.' But the next instant Drona again asked him, 'What dost thou see now,
O prince? Seest thou the tree, myself or thy brothers?' Yudhishthira
answered, 'I see the tree, myself, my brothers, and the bird.' Drona
repeated his question, but was answered as often in the same words. Drona
then, vexed with Yudhishthira, reproachingly said, 'Stand thou apart. It
is not for thee to strike the aim.' Then Drona repeated the experiment
with Duryodhana and the other sons of Dhritarashtra, one after another,
as also with his other pupils, Bhima and the rest, including the princes
that had come unto him from other lands. But the answer in every case was
the same as Yudhishthira's viz., 'We behold the tree, thyself, our
fellow-pupils, and the bird.' And reproached by their preceptor, they
were all ordered, one after another, to stand apart.'"
