
SECTION CXXXIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'After this, with his sheet loosely hanging down,
Adhiratha entered the lists, perspiring and trembling, and supporting
himself on a staff.
"Seeing him, Karna left his bow and impelled by filial regard bowed down
his head still wet with the water of inauguration. And them the
charioteer, hurriedly covering his feet with the end of his sheet,
addressed Karna crowned with success as his son. And the charioteer
embraced Karna and from excess of affection bedewed his head with tears,
that head still wet with the water sprinkled over it on account of the
coronation as king of Anga. Seeing the charioteer, the Pandava Bhimasena
took Karna for a charioteer's son, and said by way of ridicule, 'O son of
a charioteer, thou dost not deserve death in fight at the hands of
Partha. As befits thy race take thou anon the whip. And, O worst of
mortals, surely thou art not worthy to sway the kingdom of Anga, even as
a dog doth not deserve the butter placed before the sacrificial fire.'
Karna, thus addressed, with slightly quivering lips fetched a deep sigh,
looked at the God of the day in the skies. And even as a mad elephant
riseth from an assemblage of lotuses, the mighty Duryodhana rose in wrath
from among his brothers, and addressed that performer of dreadful deeds,
Bhimasena, present there, 'O Vrikodara, it behoveth thee not to speak
such words. Might is the cardinal virtue of a Kshatriya, and even a
Kshatriya of inferior birth deserveth to be fought with. The lineage of
heroes, like the sources of a lordly river, is ever unknown. The fire
that covereth the whole world riseth from the waters. The thunder that
slayeth the Danavas was made of a bone of (a mortal named) Dadhichi. The
illustrious deity Guha, who combines in his composition the portions of
all the other deities is of a lineage unknown. Some call him the
offspring of Agni; some, of Krittika, some, of Rudra, and some of Ganga.
It hath been heard by us that persons born in the Kashatriya order have
become Brahmanas. Viswamitra and others (born Kshatriyas) have obtained
the eternal Brahma. The foremost of all wielders of weapons, the
preceptor Drona hath been born in a waterpot and Kripa of the race of
Gotama hath sprung from a clump of heath. Your own births, ye Pandava
princes, are known to me. Can a she-deer bring forth a tiger (like
Karna), of the splendour of the Sun, and endued with every auspicious
mark, and born also with a natural mail and ear-rings? This prince among
men deserveth the sovereignty of the world, not of Anga only, in
consequence of the might of his arm and my swearing to obey him in
everything. If there be anybody here to whom all that I have done unto
Karna hath become intolerable, let him ascend his chariot and bend his
bow with the help of his feet.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then there arose a confused murmur amongst the
spectators approving of Duryodhana's speech. The sun, however, went down,
but prince Duryodhana taking Karna's hand led him out of the arena
lighted with countless lamps. And, O king, the Pandavas also, accompanied
by Drona and Kripa and Bhishma, returned to their abodes. And the people,
too, came away, some naming Arjuna, some Karna, and some Duryodhana (as
the victor of the day). And Kunti, recognising her son in Karna by the
various auspicious marks on his person and beholding him installed in the
sovereignty of Anga, was from motherly affection, very pleased. And
Duryodhana, O monarch, having obtained Karna (in this way), banished his
fears arising out of Arjuna's proficiency in arms. And the heroic Karna,
accomplished in arms, began to gratify Duryodhana by sweet speeches,
while Yudhishthira was impressed with the belief that there was no
warrior on earth like unto Karna.'"
