SECTION CLXIX
"Bhishma said, 'After that night had passed away and that best of
Brahmanas had left the house, Gautama, issuing from his abode, began to
proceed towards the sea, O Bharata! On the way he beheld some merchants
that used to make voyages on the sea. With that caravan of merchants he
proceeded towards the ocean. It so happened however, O king, that that
large caravan was assailed, while passing through a valley, by an
infuriated elephant. Almost all the persons were killed. Somehow escaping
from that great danger, the Brahmana fled towards the north for saving
his life not knowing whither he proceeded. Separated from the caravan and
led far away from that spot, he began to wander alone in a forest, like
Kimpurusha.[493] At last coming upon a road that led towards the ocean he
journeyed on till he reached a delightful and heavenly forest abounding
in flowering trees. It was adorned with mango trees that put forth
flowers and fruits throughout the year. It resembled the very woods of
Nandana (in heaven) and was inhabited by Yakshas and Kinnaras. It was
also adorned with Salas and palmyras and Tamalas, with clusters of black
aloes, and many large sandal trees. Upon the delightful tablelands that
he saw there, fragrant with perfumes of diverse kinds, birds of the
foremost species were always heard to pour forth their melodies. Other
winged denizens of the air, called Bharundas, and having faces resembling
those of human beings, and those called Bhulingas, and others belonging
to mountainous regions and to the sea, warbled sweetly there, Gautama
proceeded through that forest, listening, as he went, to those delightful
and charming strains of nature's choristers. On his way he beheld a very
delightful and level spot of land covered with golden sands and
resembling heaven itself, O king, for its beauty. On that plot stood a
large and beautiful banian with a spherical top. Possessed of many
branches that corresponded with the parent tree in beauty and size, that
banian looked like an umbrella set over the plain. The spot underneath
that magnificent tree was drenched with water perfumed with the most
fragrant sandal. Endued with great beauty and abounding in delicious
flowers all around, the spot looked like the court of the Grandsire
himself. Beholding that charming and unrivalled spot, abounding with
flowering trees, sacred, and looking like the abode of a very celestial,
Gautama became very much delighted. Arrived there, he sat himself down
with a well-pleased heart. As he sat there, O son of Kunti, a delicious,
charming, and auspicious breeze, bearing the perfume of many kinds of
flowers, began to blow softly, cooling the limbs of Gautama and filling
him with celestial pleasure, O monarch! Fanned by that perfumed breeze
the Brahmana became refreshed, and in consequence of the pleasure he felt
he soon fell asleep. Meanwhile the sun set behind the Asta hills. When
the resplendent luminary entered his chambers in the west and the evening
twilight came, a bird that was the foremost of his species, returned to
that spot, which was his home, from the regions of Brahman. His name was
Nadijangha and he was a dear friend of the creator. He was a prince of
Cranes, possessed of great wisdom, and a son of (the sage) Kasyapa. He
was also known extensively on earth by the name of Rajadharman. Indeed,
he surpassed everyone on earth in fame and wisdom. The child of a
celestial maiden, possessed of great beauty and learning, he resembled a
celestial in splendour. Adorned with the many ornaments that he wore and
that were as brilliant as the sun himself, that child of a celestial girl
seemed to blaze with beauty. Beholding that bird arrived at that spot,
Gautama became filled with wonder. Exhausted with hunger and thirst, the
Brahmana began to cast his eyes on the bird from desire of slaying him.'
"Rajadharman said, 'Welcome, O Brahmana! By good luck have I got thee
today in my abode. The sun is set. The evening twilight is come. Having
come to my abode, thou art today my dear and excellent guest. Having
received my worship according to the rites laid down in the scriptures,
thou mayst go whither thou wilt tomorrow morning.'"
