SECTION CLXXII
"Bhishma said, 'There, under that banian, for the protection of his
guest, the prince of birds had kindled and kept up a fire with high and
blazing flames.[496] On one side of the fire, the bird slept trustfully.
The ungrateful and wicked-souled wretch prepared to slay his sleeping
host. With the aid of that blazing fire he killed the trustful bird, and
having despatched him, became filled with delight, never thinking there
was sin in what he did. Peeling off the feathers and the down, he roasted
the flesh on that fire. Then taking it up with the gold he had brought,
the Brahmana Red quickly from that spot. The next day, the Rakshasa king,
Virupaksha, addressing his son, said, 'Alas, O son, I do not behold
Rajadharman, that best of birds, today. Every morning he repairs to the
regions of Brahman for adoring the Grandsire. While returning, he never
goes home without paying me a visit. These two mornings and two nights
have passed away without his having come to my abode. My mind, therefore,
is not in peace. Let my friend be enquired after. Gautama, who came here,
is without Vedic studies and destitute of Brahmanic splendour. He has
found his way to the abode of my friend. I greatly fear, that worst of
Brahmanas has slain Rajadharman. Of evil practices and wicked
understanding, I read him through by the signs he showed. Without
compassion, of cruel and grim visage, and wicked, that vilest of men is
like a robber. That Gautama has gone to the abode of my friend. For this
reason, my heart has become extremely anxious. O son, proceeding hence
with great speed to the abode of Rajadharman, ascertain whether that
pure-souled bird is still alive. Do not tarry.' Thus addressed by his
sire, the prince, accompanied by other Rakshasas, proceeded with great
speed. Arrived at the foot of that banian, he saw the remains of
Rajadharman. Weeping with grief, the son of the intelligent king of the
Rakshasas, ran with great speed and to the utmost of his power, for
seizing Gautama. The Rakshasas had not to go far when they succeeded in
catching the Brahmana and discovering the body of Rajadharman destitute
of wings, bones, and feet. Taking the captive with them, the Rakshasas
returned with great speed to Meruvraja, and showed the king the mutilated
body of Rajadharman, and that ungrateful and singing wretch, viz.,
Gautama. Beholding the remains of his friend the king, with his
counsellors and priest, began to weep aloud. Indeed, loud was the voice
of lamentation that was heard in his abode. The entire city of the
Rakshasa king, men, women, and children, became plunged in woe. The king
then addressed his son saying, 'Let this sinful wretch be slain. Let
these Rakshasas here feast merrily on his flesh. Of sinful deeds, of
sinful habits, of sinful soul, and inured to sin, this wretch, I think,
should be slain by you.' Thus addressed by the Rakshasa king, many
Rakshasas of terrible prowess expressed their unwillingness to eat the
flesh of that sinner. Indeed, those wanderers of the night, addressing
their king, said, 'Let this vilest of men be given away to the robbers.'
Bending their heads to their king, they told him so, adding, 'It behoveth
thee not to give us this sinful wretch for our food.' The king said unto
them, 'Let it be so! Let this ungrateful wight be given to the robbers
then without delay.' Thus addressed by him, the Rakshasas armed with
lances and battle-axes, hacked that vile wretch into pieces and gave them
away to the robbers. It so happened, however, that the very robbers
refused to eat the flesh of that vile man. Though cannibals, O monarch,
they would not eat an ungrateful person. For one that slays a Brahmana,
for one that drinks alcohol, for one that steals, for one that has fallen
away from a vow, there is expiation, O king. But there is no expiation
for an ungrateful person. That cruel and vile man who injures a friend
and becomes ungrateful, is not eaten by the very cannibals nor by the
worms that feed on carrion.'
