SECTION XCIII
"Vamadeva continued, 'When the king, who is powerful, acts unrighteously
towards the weak, they who take their birth in his race imitate the same
conduct. Others, again, imitate that wretch who sets sin agoing. Such
imitation of the man ungoverned by restraints soon brings destruction
upon the kingdom. The conduct of a king who is observant of his proper
duties, is accepted by men in general as a model for imitation. The
conduct, however, of a king who falls away from his duties, is not
tolerated by his very kinsfolk. That rash king who, disregarding the
injunctions laid down in the scriptures, acts with highhandedness in his
kingdom, very soon meets with destruction. That Kshatriya who does not
follow the conduct observed from days of old by other Kshatriyas.
conquered or unconquered, is said to fall away from Kshatriya duties.
Having seized in battle a royal foe that did some good to the conqueror
on a former occasion, that king who does not, actuated by malice, pay him
honours, is said to fall away from Kshatriya duties. The king should
display his power, live cheerfully, and do what is necessary in seasons
of danger. Such a ruler becomes the beloved of all creatures and never
falls away from prosperity. If thou doest disservice to any person, thou
shouldst, when the turn comes, do him service. One who is not loved
becomes an object of love, if he does what is agreeable. Untruthful
speeches should be avoided. Thou shouldst do good to others without being
solicited. Thou shouldst never abandon righteousness from lust or wrath
or malice. Do not give harsh answers when questioned by anybody. Do not
utter undignified speeches. Never be in a hurry to do anything. Never
indulge in malice. By such means is a foe won over. Do not give way to
exclusive joy when anything agreeable occurs, nor suffer thyself to be
overwhelmed with sorrow when anything disagreeable occurs. Never indulge
in grief when thy pecuniary resources are exhausted, and always remember
the duty of doing good to thy subjects. That king who always does what is
agreeable by virtue of his disposition achieves success in all his
measures and is never shorn of prosperity. The king should always, with
heedfulness, cherish that devoted servant who abstains from doing what is
injurious to his master and who always does what is for his good. He
should appoint in all great affairs persons that have subjugated their
senses, that are devotedly loyal and of pure behaviour, and that are
possessed of ability. That person, who by the possession of such
qualifications pleases the king and who is never heedless in taking care
of the interests of his master should be appointed by the king in the
affairs of his kingdom. On the other hand, the king becomes divested of
prosperity by appointing to important offices men that are fools and
slaves of their senses, that are covetous and of disrespectable conduct,
that are deceitful and hypocritical, that are malicious, wicked-souled,
and ignorant, that are low-minded, and addicted to drink, gambling,
women, and hunting. That king, who, first protecting his own self,
protects others that deserve protection, feels the satisfaction of
finding his subjects growing in prosperity. Such a king succeeds also in
obtaining greatness. A king should, by secret agents that are devoted to
him, watch the conduct and acts of other kings. By such means can he
obtain superiority. Having injured a powerful king, one should not
comfort himself with the thought that he (the injurer) lives at a great
distance from the injured. Such a king when injured falls upon the
injurer like the hawk swooping down upon its prey, in moments of
heedlessness. A king whose power has been consolidated and who is
confident of his own strength, should assail a neighbour who is weaker
than himself but never one that is stronger. A king who is devoted to
virtue, having acquired the sovereignty of the earth by prowess, should
protect his subjects righteously and slaughter foes in battle. Everything
belonging to this world is destined to destruction. Nothing here is
durable. For this reason, the king, adhering to righteousness, should
protect his subjects righteously. The defence of forts, battle,
administration of justice, consultations on questions of policy, and
keeping the subjects in happiness, these five acts contribute to enlarge
the dominions of a king. That king who takes proper care of these is
regarded to be the best of kings. By always attending to these, a king
succeeds in protecting his kingdom. It is impossible, however, for one
man to supervise all these matters at all times. Making over such
supervision to his ministers, a King may govern the earth for ever.[277]
The people make such a person their king who is liberal, who shares all
objects of enjoyment with others, who is possessed of a mild disposition,
who is of pure behaviour, and who will never abandon his subjects. He is
obeyed in the world who, having listened to counsels of wisdom, accepts
them, abandoning his own opinions. That king who does not tolerate the
counsels of a well-wisher in consequence of their opposition to his own
views, who listens with inattention to what is said unto him in
opposition to his views, and who does not always follow the conduct of
high and noble persons conquered or unconquered, is said to fall away
from the duties of Kshatriyas. From ministers that have once been
chastised, from women in especial, from mountains and inaccessible
regions, from elephants and horses and reptiles, the king should always,
with heedfulness, protect his own self.[278] That king who, abandoning
his chief ministers, makes favourites of low persons, soon falls into
distress, and never succeeds in compassing the (intended) ends of his
measures. That king of infirm soul, who, yielding to the influence of
wrath and malice, does not love and honour those amongst his kinsmen that
are possessed of good qualities, is said to live on the very verge of
destruction. That king, who attaches to himself accomplished persons by
doing good to them even though he may not like them at heart, succeeds in
enjoying fame for ever. Thou shouldst never impose taxes unseasonably.
Thou shouldst not be grieved at the occurrence of anything disagreeable,
nor rejoice exceedingly at anything agreeable. Thou shouldst always set
thyself to the accomplishment of good acts. Who amongst the dependent
kings is truly devoted to thee, and who is loyal to thee from fear, and
who amongst them has faults, should always be ascertained by thee. The
king, even if he be powerful, should trust them that are weak, for in
moments of heedlessness the weak may assail the powerful like a flock of
vultures seizing their prey. A man of sinful soul seeks to injure his
master even if the latter be sweet-speeched and possessed of every
accomplishment. Do not, therefore, place thy confidence upon such men.
Nahusha's son Yayati, in declaring the mysteries of king-craft, said that
a person engaged in ruling men should slay even foes that are
contemptible.'"
