SECTION CXXXV
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old story of a robber who
having in this would been observant of restraints did not meet with
destruction in the next. There was a robber of the name of Kayavya, born
of a Kshatriya father and a Nishada mother. Kayavya was a practiser of
Kshatriya duties. Capable of smiting, possessed of intelligence and
courage, conversant with the scriptures, destitute of cruelty, devoted to
the Brahmanas, and worshipping his seniors and preceptors with reverence,
he protected the ascetics in the observance of their practices. Though a
robber, he still succeeded in winning felicity in heaven. Morning and
evening he used to excite the wrath of the deer by chasing them. He was
well conversant with all the practices of the Nishadas as also of all
animals living in the forest. Well acquainted with the requirements of
time and place, he roved over the mountains. Acquainted as he was with
the habits of all animals, his arrows never missed their aim, and his
weapons were strong. Alone, he could vanquish many hundreds of troops. He
worshipped his old, blind, and deaf parents in the forest every day. With
honey and flesh and fruits and roots and other kinds of excellent food,
he hospitably entertained all persons deserving of honour and did them
many good offices. He showed great respect for those Brahmanas that had
retired from the world for taking up their residence in the woods.
Killing the deer, he often took flesh to them. As regards those that were
unwilling, from fear of others, to accept gifts from him because of the
profession he followed, he used to go to their abodes before dawn and
leave flesh at their doors.[406] One day many thousands of robbers,
destitute of compassion in their conduct and regardless of all
restraints, desired to elect him as their leader.'
"The robbers said, 'Thou art acquainted with the requirements of place
and time. Thou hast wisdom and courage. Thy firmness also is great in
everything thou undertakest. Be thou our foremost of leaders, respected
by us all, We will do as thou wilt direct. Protect us duly, even as a
father or mother.'
"Kayavya said, 'Never kill ye a woman, or one that from fear keeps away
from the fight, or one that is a child, or one that is an ascetic. One
that abstains from fight should never be slain, nor should women be
seized or brought away with force. None of you should ever slay a woman
amongst all creatures. Let Brahmanas be always blessed and you should
always fight for their good. Truth should never be sacrificed. The
marriages of men should never be obstructed. No injury should be
inflicted on those houses in which the deities, the Pitris, and guests
are worshipped. Amongst creatures, Brahmanas deserve to be exempted by
you in your plundering excursions. By giving away even your all, you
should worship them. He who incurs the wrath of the Brahmanas, he for
whose discomfiture they wish, fails to find a rescuer in the three
worlds. He who speaks ill of the Brahmanas and wishes for their
destruction, himself meets with destruction like darkness at sunrise.
Residing here, ye shall acquire the fruits of your valour. Troops shall
be sent against those that will refuse to give us our dues. The rod of
chastisement is intended for the wicked. It is not intended for
self-aggrandisement. They who oppress the god deserve death, it is said.
They who seek to aggrandise their fortunes by afflicting kingdoms in
unscrupulous ways, very soon come to be regarded as vermin in a dead
body. Those robbers again that would conduct themselves by conforming to
these restraints of the scriptures, would soon win salvation although
leading a plundering life.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Those robbers, thus addressed, obeyed all the
commands of Kayavya. By desisting from sin, they obtained great
prosperity. By behaving himself in such a way by thus doing good to the
honest and by thus restraining the robbers from bad practices, Kayavya
won great success (in the next world). He who always thinks of this
narrative of Kayavya will not have any fear from the denizens of the
forest, in fact, from any earthly creature. Such a man will have no fear
from any creature, O Bharata! He will have no fear from wicked men. If
such a man goes to the forest, he will be able to live there with the
security of a king.'"
