
SECTION CXXXVIII
"Vaisampayana continued, 'When the spectators, with eyes expanded with
wonder, made way for that subjugator of hostile cities, Karna, that hero
with his natural mail and face brightened with ear-rings, took up his bow
and girded on his sword, and then entered the spacious lists, like a
walking cliff. That far-famed destroyer of hostile hosts, the large-eyed
Karna, was born of Pritha in her maidenhood. He was a portion of the
hot-beamed Sun and his energy and prowess were like unto those of the
lion, or the bull, or the leader of a herd of elephants. In splendour he
resembled the Sun, in loveliness the Moon, and in energy the fire.
Begotten by the Sun himself, he was tall in stature like a golden palm
tree, and, endued with the vigour of youth, he was capable of slaying a
lion. Handsome in features, he was possessed of countless
accomplishments. The mighty-armed warrior, eyeing all around the arena,
bowed indifferently to Drona and Kripa. And the entire assembly,
motionless and with steadfast gaze, thought, 'Who is he?' And they became
agitated in their curiosity to know the warrior. And that foremost of
eloquent men, the offspring of the Sun, in a voice deep as that of the
clouds, addressed his unknown brother, the son of the subduer of the
Asura, Paka (Indra), saying, 'O Partha, I shall perform feats before this
gazing multitude; excelling all thou hast performed! Beholding them, thou
shall be amazed.' And, O thou best of those blest with speech, he had
hardly done when the spectators stood up all at once, uplifted by some
instrument, as it were. And, O tiger among men, Duryodhana was filled
with delight, while Vibhatsu was instantly all abashment and anger. Then
with the permission of Drona, the mighty Karna, delighting in battle,
there did all that Partha had done before. And, O Bharata, Duryodhana
with his brothers thereupon embraced Karna in joy and then addressed him
saying, 'Welcome O mighty-armed warrior! I have obtained thee by good
fortune, O polite one! Live thou as thou pleasest, and command me, and
the kingdom of the Kurus.' Kama replied, 'When thou hast said it, I
regard it as already accomplished. I only long for thy friendship. And, O
lord, my wish is even for a single combat with Arjuna.' Duryodhana said,
'Do thou with me enjoy the good things of life! Be thou the benefactor of
thy friend, and, O represser of enemies, place thou thy feet on the heads
of all foes."
"Vaisampayanacontinued, 'Arjuna, after this, deeming himself disgraced,
said unto Karna stationed amidst the brothers like unto a cliff, 'That
path which the unwelcome intruder and the uninvited talker cometh to,
shall be thine, O Karna, for thou shall be slain by me.' Karna replied,
'This arena is meant for all, not for thee alone, O Phalguna! They are
kings who are superior in energy; and verily the Kshatriya regardeth
might and might alone. What need of altercation which is the exercise of
the weak? O Bharata, speak then in arrows until with arrows I strike off
thy head today before the preceptor himself!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hastily embraced by his brothers, Partha that
subduer of hostile cities, with the permission of Drona, advanced for the
combat. On the other side, Karna, having been embraced by Duryodhana with
his brothers, taking up his bow and arrows, stood ready for the fight.
Then the firmament became enveloped in clouds emitting flashes of
lightning, and the coloured bow of Indra appeared shedding its effulgent
rays. And the clouds seemed to laugh on account of the rows of white
cranes that were then on the wing. And seeing Indra thus viewing the
arena from affection (for his son), the sun too dispersed the clouds from
over his own offspring. And Phalguna remained deep hid under cover of the
clouds, while Karna remained visible, being surrounded by the rays of the
Sun. And the son of Dhritarashtra stood by Karna, and Bharadwaja and
Kripa and Bhishma remained with Partha. And the assembly was divided, as
also the female spectators. And knowing the state of things, Kunti the
daughter of Bhoja, swooned away. And by the help of female attendants,
Vidura, versed in the lore of all duties, revived the insensible Kunti by
sprinkling sandal-paste and water on her person. On being restored to
consciousness, Kunti, seeing her two sons clad in mail, was seized with
fear, but she could do nothing (to protect them). And beholding both the
warriors with bows strung in their hands the son of Saradwat, viz.,
Kripa, knowing all duties and cognisant of the rules regulating duels,
addressed Karna, saying 'This Pandava, who is the youngest son of Kunti,
belongeth to the Kaurava race: he will engage in combat with thee. But, O
mighty-armed one, thou too must tell us thy lineage and the names of thy
father and mother and the royal line of which thou art the ornament.
Learning all this, Partha will fight with thee or not (as he will think
fit). Sons of kings never fight with men of inglorious lineage.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'When he was thus addressed by Kripa, Karna's
countenance became like unto a lotus pale and torn with the pelting
showers in the rainy season. Duryodhana said, 'O preceptor, verily the
scriptures have it that three classes of persons can lay claim to
royalty, viz., persons of the blood royal, heroes, and lastly, those that
lead armies. If Phalguna is unwilling to fight with one who is not a
king, I will install Karna as king of Anga.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'At that very moment, seated on a golden seat, with
parched paddy and with flowers and water-pots and much gold, the mighty
warrior Karna was installed king by Brahmanas versed in mantras. And the
royal umbrella was held over his head, while Yak-tails waved around that
redoubtable hero of graceful mien. And the cheers, having ceased, king
(Karna) said unto the Kaurava Duryodhana, 'O tiger among monarchs, what
shall I give unto thee that may compare with thy gift of a kingdom? O
king, I will do all thou biddest!' And Suyodhana said unto him, 'I
eagerly wish for thy friendship.' Thus spoken to, Karna replied, 'Be it
so.' And they embraced each other in joy, and experienced great
happiness.'"
