SECTION CLXI
"Bhishma said, 'They that are possessed of knowledge say that everything
has penance for its root. That foolish person who has not undergone
penances does not meet with the rewards of even his own acts. The
puissant Creator created all this universe with the aid of penances.
After the same manner, the Rishis acquired the Vedas through the power of
penances. It was by the aid of penances that the Grandsire created food,
fruit and roots. It is by penances that persons crowned with ascetic
success behold the three worlds, with rapt souls. Medicines and all
antidotes to injurious substances, and the diverse acts (seen here),
produce their intended results through the aid of penance. The
accomplishment of all purposes depends upon penance. Whatever things
there are that are apparently unattainable are sure to be won by the aid
of penance. Without doubt, the Rishis obtained their sixfold divine
attributes through penance. A person that drinks alcoholic stimulants,
one that appropriates the possessions of others without their consent,
one guilty of foeticide, one that violates one's preceptor's bed, are all
cleansed by penance properly practised. Penances are of many kinds. They
exhibit themselves through various outlets. Of all kinds of penances,
however, that one may Practise after abstaining from pleasure and
enjoyment, abstention from food Is the highest and best. The penance
involved in abstention from food is superior, O king, to even compassion,
truthfulness of speech, gifts, and restraining the senses. There is no
act more difficult to accomplish than gift. There is no mode of life that
is superior to serving one's mother. There is no creature superior to
those that are conversant with the three Vedas. Similarly, Renunciation
constitutes the highest penance. People keep their senses under control
for taking care of their virtue and heaven. In respect of such control
over the senses as also in the acquisition of virtue, there is no penance
higher than abstention from food. The Rishis, the gods, human beings,
beasts, birds, and whatever other creatures there are, mobile or
immobile, are all devoted to penances, and whatever success they win is
won through penance. Thus it was through penance that the gods acquired
their superiority These (luminaries in the firmament) that have got their
shares of felicity, are always the results of penance. Without doubt,
through penance the very status of godhead may be acquired.'"
