SECTION CVI
"The king said, 'I do not desire, O Brahmana, to support life by deceit
or fraud. I do not desire wealth, however great, which is to be earned by
unrighteous means. At the very outset of our present discourse I excepted
these means. By the adoption of only such means as would not lead to
censure, of such means as would benefit me in every respect, by
practising only such acts as are not harmful in their consequences, I
desire to live in this world.. I am incapable of adopting these ways that
thou pointest out to me. Indeed, these instructions do not become thee.'
"The sage said, 'These words, O Kshatriya, that thou speakest indicate
thee to be possessed of righteous feelings. Indeed, thou art righteous in
disposition and understanding, O thou of great experience. I shall strive
for the good of you both, viz., for thyself and him.[325] I shall cause a
union, eternal and incapable of breach, to be brought about between thee
and that king. Who is there that would not like to have a minister like
thee that art born of noble race, that abstainest from all acts of
unrighteousness and cruelty, that art possessed of great learning, and
that art well versed in the art of government and of conciliating all
persons? I say this because, O Kshatriya, though divested of kingdom and
plunged into great misery, thou still desirest to live adopting a
behaviour that is righteous. The ruler of the Videhas, firmly adhering to
truth, will come to my abode soon. Without doubt, he will do what I will
urge to do.'
"Bhishma continued, "The sage, after this, inviting the ruler of the
Videhas, said these words unto him: 'This personage is of royal birth. I
know his very heart. His soul is as pure as the surface of mirror or the
disc of the autumnal moon. He has been examined by me in every way. I do
not see any fault in him. Let there be friendship between him and thee.
Do thou repose confidence on him as on myself. A king who is without a
(competent) minister cannot govern his kingdom even for three days. The
minister should be courageous as also possessed of great intelligence. By
these two qualities one may conquer both the worlds. Behold, O king,
these two qualities are necessary for ruling a kingdom. Righteous kings
have no such refuge as a minister possessed of such attributes. The
high-souled person is of royal descent. He walketh along, the path of the
righteous. This one who always keeps righteousness in view has been a
valuable acquisition. If treated by thee with honour, he will reduce all
thy foes to subjection. If he engages in battle with thee, he will do
what as a Kshatriya he should do. Indeed, if after the manner of his
sires and grandsires he fights for conquering thee, it will be thy duty
to fight him, observant as thou art of the Kshatriya duty of conquering
antagonists. Without engaging in battle, however, do thou, at my command,
employ him under thee from desire of benefiting thyself. Cast thy eyes on
righteousness, giving up covetousness that is improper. It behoveth thee
not to abandon the duties of thy order from lust or desire of battle.
Victory O sire, is not certain. Defeat also is not certain. Remembering
this, peace should be made with an enemy by giving him food and other
articles of enjoyment. One may see victory and defeat in his own case.
They that seek to exterminate a foe are sometimes exterminated themselves
in course of their efforts.' Thus addressed, king Janaka, properly
saluting and honouring that bull among Brahmanas who deserved every
honour, replied unto him, saying, 'Thou art of great learning and great
wisdom. That which thou hast said from desire of benefiting us, is
certainly advantageous for both of us. Such a course of conduct is highly
beneficial (to us). I have no hesitation in saying this. The ruler of
Videha then, addressing the prince of Kosala, said these words: 'In
observance of Kshatriya duties as also with aid of Policy, I have
conquered the world. I have, however, O best of kings, been conquered by
thee with thy good qualities. Without cherishing any sense of humiliation
(if thou remainest by my side), live thou with me as a victor.[326] I
honour thy intelligence, and I honour thy prowess. I do not disregard
thee, saying that I have conquered thee. On the other hand, live thou
with me as a victor. Honoured duly by me, O king, thou wilt go to my
abode. Both the kings then worshipped that Brahmana, and trusting each
other, proceeded to the capital of Mithila. The ruler of the Videhas,
causing the prince of Kosala to enter his abode, honoured him, who
deserved every honour, with offerings of water to wash his feet, honey
and curds and the usual articles. King Janaka also bestowed upon his
guest his own daughter and diverse kinds of gems and jewels. This (the
establishment of peace) is the high duty of kings; victory and defeat are
both uncertain.'"
