
SECTION CXXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then, O king, the mighty son of Bharadyaja presented
himself before Drupada, and addressing that monarch, said, 'Know me for
thy friend.' Thus addressed by his friend, the son of Bharadwaja, with a
joyous heart, the lord of the Panchalas was ill-able to bear that speech.
The king, intoxicated with the pride of wealth, contracted his brows in
wrath, and with reddened eyes spake these words unto Drona, 'O Brahmana,
thy intelligence is scarcely of a high order, inasmuch as thou sayest
unto me, all on a sudden, that thou art my friend! O thou of dull
apprehension, great kings can never be friends with such luckless and
indigent wights as thou! It is true there had been friendship between
thee and me before, for we were then both equally circumstanced. But Time
that impaireth everything in its course, impaireth friendship also. In
this world, friendship never endureth for ever in any heart. Time weareth
it off and anger destroyeth it too. Do not stick, therefore, to that
worn-off friendship. Think not of it any longer. The friendship I had
with thee, O first of Brahmanas, was for a particular purpose. Friendship
can never subsist between a poor man and a rich man, between a man of
letters and an unlettered mind, between a hero and a coward. Why dost
thou desire the continuance of our former friendship? There may be
friendship or hostility between persons equally situated as to wealth or
might. The indigent and the affluent can neither be friends nor quarrel
with each other. One of impure birth can never be a friend to one of pure
birth; one who is not a car-warrior can never be a friend to one who is
so; and one who is not a king never have a king for his friend.
Therefore, why dost thou desire the continuance of our former friendship?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Drupada, the mighty son of
Bharadwaja became filled with wrath, and reflecting for a moment, made up
his mind as to his course of action. Seeing the insolence of the Panchala
king, he wished to check it effectually. Hastily leaving the Panchala
capital Drona bent his steps towards the capital of the Kurus, named
after the elephant.'"
