SECTION CXXIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'Like one that drinks nectar I am never satiated with
listening to thee as thou speakest. As a person possessing a knowledge of
self is never satiated with meditation, even so I am never satiated with
hearing thee. Do thou, therefore, O grandsire, discourse once more upon
morality. I am never satiated with drinking the nectar of thy discourse
upon morality.'
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse between Gotama and the illustrious Yama. Gotama owned a wide
retreat on the Paripatra hills. Listen to me as to how many years he
dwelt in that abode. For sixty thousand years that sage underwent ascetic
austerities in that asylum. One day, the Regent of the world, Yama, O
tiger among men, repaired to that great sage of cleansed soul while he
was engaged in the severest austerities. Yama beheld the great ascetic
Gotama of rigid penances. The regenerate sage understanding that it was
Yama who had come, speedily saluted him and sat with joined hands in an
attentive attitude (waiting for his commands). The royal Dharma,
beholding that bull among Brahmanas, duly saluted him (in return) and
addressing him asked what he was to do for him.'
"Gotama said, "By doing what acts does one liberate one's self from the
debt One owes to one's mother and father? How also does one succeed in
winning regions of pure bliss that are so difficult of attainment?'
"Yama said, 'Devoting one's self to the duty of truth, and practising
purity and penances one should ceaselessly worship one's mother and
father. One should also perform Horse-sacrifices with presents in
profusion unto the Brahmanas. By such acts one wins many regions (of
felicity) of wonderful aspect.'"
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
