SECTION CXXV
"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast said, O grandsire, that behaviour is the
first (of requisites for a man). Whence, however, does Hope arise? Tell
me what it is. This great doubt has taken possession of my mind. There is
no other person than thee, O subjugator of hostile towns, who can remove
it. O grandsire, I had great hope in respect of Suyodhana that when, a
battle was about to ensue (in consequence of his own obstinacy), he
would, O lord, do what was proper. In every man hope is great. When that
hope is destroyed, great is the grief that succeeds, and which, without
doubt, is equal to almost death itself. Fool that I am, Dhritarashtra's
wicked-souled son, Duryodhana, destroyed the hope I had cherished.
Behold, O king, the foolishness of my mind! I think that hope is vaster
than a mountain with all its trees. Or, perhaps, it is vaster than the
firmament itself. Or, perhaps, O king, it is really immeasurable. Hope, O
chief of the Kurus, is exceedingly difficult of being understood and
equally difficult of being subdued. Beholding this last attribute of
Hope, I ask, what else is so unconquerable as this?'
"Bhishma said, 'I shall narrate to thee, O Yudhishthira, in this
connection, the discourse between Sumitra and Rishabha that took place in
olden times. Listen to it. A royal sage of the Haihaya race, Sumitra by
name, went out a hunting. He pursued a deer, having pierced it with a
straight shaft. Possessed of great strength, the deer ran ahead, with the
arrow sticking to him. The king was possessed of great strength, and
accordingly pursued with great speed his prey. The animal, endued with
fleetness, quickly cleared a low ground and then a level plain. The king,
young, active and strong, and armed with bow and sword and cased in mail,
still pursued it. Unaccompanied by anybody, in chasing the animal through
the forest the king crossed many rivers and streams and lakes and copses.
Endued with great speed, the animal, at its will, showing itself now and
then to the king, ran on with great speed. Pierced with many shafts by
the king, that denizen of wilderness, O monarch, as if in sport,
repeatedly lessened the distance between itself and the pursuer.
Repeatedly putting forth its speed and traversing one forest after
another, it now and then showed itself to the king at a near point. At
last that crusher of foes, taking a very superior shaft, sharp, terrible,
and capable of penetrating into the very vitals, fixed it on his
bowstring. The animal then, of huge proportions, as if laughing at the
pursuer's efforts suddenly distanced him by reaching a point full four
miles ahead of the range of the shaft. That arrow of blazing splendour
accordingly fell on the ground. The deer entered a large forest but the
king still continued the chase.'"
