SECTION LXXXIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'What should be the characteristics, O grandsire, of
the legislators, the ministers of war, the courtiers, the generalissimos,
and the counsellors of a king!'
"Bhishma said, 'Such persons as are possessed of modesty, self-restraint,
truth, sincerity, and courage to say what is proper, should be thy
legislators. They that are always by thy side, that are possessed of
great courage, that are of the regenerate caste, possessed of great
learning, well pleased with thee, and endued with perseverance in all
acts, should, O son of Kunti, be desired by thee for becoming thy
ministers of war at all seasons of distress, O Bharata! One who is of
high descent, who, treated with honour by thee, always exerts his powers
to the utmost on thy behalf, and who will never abandon thee in weal or
woe, illness or death, should be entertained by thee as a courtier. They
that are of high birth, that are born in thy kingdom, that have wisdom,
beauty of form and features, great learning, and dignity of behaviour,
and that are, besides, devoted to thee, should be employed as officers of
thy army. Persons of tow descent and covetous dispositions, who are cruet
and shameless would court thee, O sire, as long as their hands would
remain wet.[244] They that are of good birth and good behaviour, that can
read all signs and gestures, that are destitute of cruelty, that know
what the requirements are of place and time, that always seek the good of
their master in all acts, should be appointed as ministers by the king in
all his affairs. They that have been won over with gifts of wealth,
honours, regardful receptions, and means of procuring felicity, and who
on that account may be regarded by thee as persons inclined to benefit
thee in all thy affairs, should always be made sharers of thy happiness.
They that are unchangeable in conduct, possessed of learning and good
behaviour, observant of excellent vows, large-hearted, and truthful in
speech, will always be attentive to thy affairs and will never abandon
thee, They, on the other hand, that are disrespectable, that are not
observant of restraints, that are of wicked souls, and that have fallen
away from good practices, should always be compelled by thee to observe
all wholesome restraints. When the question is which of two sides should
be adopted, thou shouldst not abandon the many for adopting the side of
one. When, however, that one person transcends the many in consequence of
the possession of many accomplishments, then thou shouldst, for that one,
abandon the many. These are regarded as marks of superiority, viz.,
prowess, devotion to pursuits that bring fame, and observance of
wholesome restraints. He, again, that honours all persons possessed of
ability, that never indulges in feelings of rivalry with persons
possessed of no merit, that never abandons righteousness from lust or
fear or wrath or covetousness, that is adorned with humility, that is
truthful in speech and forgiving in temper, that has his soul under
control, that has a sense of dignity, and that has been tried in every
situation, should be employed by thee as thy counsellor. High descent,
purity of blood, forgiveness, cleverness, and purity of soul, bravery,
gratefulness, and truth, are, O son of Pritha marks of superiority and
goodness. A wise man who conducts himself in this way,[245] succeeds in
disarming his very foes of their hostility and converting them into
friend. A king that has his soul under restraint, that is possessed of
wisdom, and that is desirous of prosperity, should carefully examine the
merits and demerits of his ministers. A king desirous of prosperity and
of shining in the midst of his contemporaries, should have for ministers
persons connected with his trusted friends, possessed of high birth born
in his own kingdom, incapable of being corrupted, unstained by adultery
and similar vices, well tested, belonging to good families, possessed of
learning, sprung from sires and grandsires that held similar offices, and
adorned with humility. The king should employ five such persons to look
after his affairs as are possessed of intelligence unstained by pride, a
disposition that is good, energy, patience, forgiveness, purity, loyalty,
firmness, and courage, whose merits and faults have been well tested, who
are of mature years, who are capable of bearing burthens, and who are
free from deceit. Men that are wise in speech, that are possessed of
heroism, that are full of resources under difficulties, that are of high
birth, that are truthful, that can read signs, that are free from
cruelty, that are conversant with the requirements of place and time, and
that desire the good of their masters, should be employed by the king as
his ministers in all affairs of the kingdom. One who is bereft of energy
and who has been abandoned by friends can never work with perseverance.
Such a man, if employed, fails in almost every business. A minister
possessed of little learning, even if blessed with high birth and
attentive to virtue, profit, and pleasure, becomes incompetent in
choosing proper courses of action. Similarly, a person of low descent,
even if possessed of great learning, always errs, like a blind man
without a guide, in all acts requiring dexterity and foresight. A person,
again, who is of infirm purposes, even if possessed of intelligence and
learning, and even if conversant with means, cannot long act with
success. A man of wicked heart and possessed of no learning may set his
hand to work but he fails to ascertain what the results will be of his
work. A king should never repose trust on a minister that is not devoted
to him. He should, therefore, never disclose his counsels to a minister
that is not devoted to him. Such a wicked minister, combining with the
other ministers of the king, may ruin his master, like a fire consuming a
tree by entering its entrails through the holes in its body with the aid
of the wind. Giving way to wrath, a master may one day pull down a
servant from his office or reprove him, from rage, in harsh words, and
restore him to power again. None but a servant devoted to the master can
bear and forgive such treatment. Ministers also become sometime highly
offended with their royal masters. That one, however, amongst them, who
subdues his wrath from desire of doing good to his master,--that person
who is a sharer with the king of his weal and woe,--should be consulted
by the king in all his affairs. A person who is of crooked heart, even if
he be devoted to his master and possessed of wisdom and adorned with.
numerous virtues, should never be consulted by the king. One who is
allied with foes and who does not regard the interests of the king's
subjects, should be known as an enemy. The king should never consult with
him. One who is possessed of no learning, who is not pure, who is stained
with pride, who pays court to the king's enemies, who indulges in brag,
who is unfriendly, wrathful, and covetous should not be consulted by the
king. One who is a stranger, even if he be devoted to the king and
possessed of great learning, may be honoured by the king and gratified
with assignment of the means of sustenance, but the king should never
consult him in his affairs. A person whose sire was unjustly banished by
royal edict should not be consulted by the king even if the king may have
subsequently bestowed honours upon him and assigned to him the means of
sustenance. A well-wisher whose property was once confiscated for a
slight transgression, even if he be possessed of every accomplishment
should not still be consulted by the king. A person possessed of wisdom,
intelligence, and learning, who is born within the kingdom, who is pure
and righteous in all his acts, deserves to be consulted by the king. One
who is endued with knowledge and wisdom, who is acquainted with the
dispositions of his friends and foes, who is such a friend of the king as
to be his second self, deserves to be consulted. One who is truthful in
speech and modest and mild and who is a hereditary servant of the king,
deserves to be consulted. One who is contented and honoured, who is
truthful and dignified, who hates wickedness and wicked men, who is
conversant with policy and the requirements of time, and who is
courageous, deserves to be consulted by the king. One who is competent to
win over all men by conciliation should be consulted, O monarch, by the
king that is desirous of ruling according to the dictates of the science
of chastisement. One upon whom the inhabitants of both the capital and
the provinces repose confidence for his righteous conduct, who is
competent to fight and conversant with the rules of policy, deserves to
be consulted by the king. Therefore, men possessed of such qualities, men
conversant with the dispositions of all and desirous of achieving high
acts, should be honoured by the king and made his ministers. Their number
also should not be less than three.[246] Ministers should be employed in
observing the laches of their masters, of themselves, of the subjects,
and of the foes of their master. The kingdom has its root in the counsels
of policy that flow from ministers, and its growth proceeds from the same
source. Ministers should act in such a way that the enemies of their
master may not be able to detect his laches. On the other hand, when
their laches become visible, they should then be assailed. Like the
tortoise protecting its limbs by withdrawing them within its shell,
ministers should protect their own counsels. They should, even thus,
conceal their own laches. Those ministers of a kingdom that succeed in
concealing their counsels are said to be possessed of wisdom. Counsels
constitute the armour of a king, and the limbs of his subjects and
officers. A kingdom is said to have its roots in spies and secret agents,
and its strength is said to lie in counsels of policy. If masters and
ministers follow each other for deriving support from each other,
subduing pride and wrath, and vanity and envy, they may then both become
happy. A king should also consult with such ministers as are free from
the five kinds of deceit. Ascertaining well, in the first instance, the
different opinions of the three amongst them whom he has consulted, the
king should, for subsequent deliberation, repair to his preceptor for
informing him of those opinions and his own. His preceptor should be a
Brahmana well versed in all matters of virtue, profit, and pleasure.
Repairing, for such subsequent deliberation, to him, the king should,
with collected mind, ask his opinion. When a decision is arrived at after
deliberation with him, the king should then, without attachment, carry it
out into practice. They that are conversant with the conclusions of the
science of consultation say that kings should always hold consultation in
this way. Having settled counsels in this way, they should then be
reduced to practice, for then they will be able to win over all the
subjects. There should be no dwarfs, no humpbacked persons, no one of an
emaciated constitution, no one who is lame or blind, no one who is an
idiot, no woman, and no eunuch, at the spot where the king holds his
consultations. Nothing should move there before or behind, above or
below, or in transverse directions. Getting up on a boat, or repairing to
an open space destitute of grass or grassy bushes and whence the
surrounding land may be clearly seen, the king should hold consultations
at the proper time, avoiding faults of speech and gestures.'"
