SECTION CXLVIII
"Bhishma said, 'After the fowler had left that spot, the she-pigeon,
remembering her husband and afflicted with grief on his account, wept
copiously and indulged in these lamentations, 'I cannot, O dear lord,
recollect a single instance of thy having done me an injury! Widows, even
if mothers of many children, are still miserable! Bereft of her husband,
a woman becomes helpless and an object of pity with her friends. I was
always cherished by thee, and in consequence of the great respect thou
hadst for me I was always honoured by thee with sweet, agreeable,
charming, and delightful words. I sported with thee in valleys, in
springs of rivers, and on delightful tops of trees. I was also made happy
by thee while roving with thee through the skies. I used to sport with
thee before, O dear lord, but where are those joys now? Limited are the
gifts of the father, of the brother, and of the son to a woman. The gifts
that her husband alone makes to her are unlimited. What woman is there
that would not, therefore, adore her lord? A woman has no protector like
her lord, and no happiness like her lord. Abandoning all her wealth and
possessions, a woman should take to her lord as her only refuge. Life
here is of no use to me, O lord, now that I am separated from thee. What
chaste woman is there that would, when deprived of her lord, venture to
bear the burden of life?' Filled with sorrow and indulging in such
piteous lamentations, the she-pigeon, devoted to her lord, cast herself
on the blazing fire. She then beheld her (deceased) husband adorned with
bracelets, seated on a (celestial) car, and adored by many high-souled
and meritorious beings standing around him. Indeed, there he was in the
firmament, decked with fine garlands and attired in excellent robes, and
adorned with every ornament. Around him were innumerable celestial cars
ridden by beings who had acted meritoriously while in this world. Seated
on his own celestial car, the bird ascended to heaven, and obtaining
proper honours for his deeds in this world, continued to sport in joy,
accompanied by his wife.'"
