SECTION CLXXI
"Bhishma said, 'Led into a spacious apartment, Gautama was introduced to
the king of the Rakshasas. Worshipped by the latter (with the usual
offerings), he took his seat on an excellent seat. The king asked him
about the race of his birth and his practices, his study of the Vedas and
his observance of the Brahmacharya vow. The Brahmana, however, without
answering the other queries, only stated his name and race. The king
having ascertained only the name and the race of his guest, and seeing
that he was destitute of Brahmanic splendour and Vedic studies, next
enquired about the country of his residence.'
"The Rakshasa said, 'Where is thy residence, O blessed one, and to what
race does thy wife belong? Tell us truly, do not fear. Trust us without
anxiety.'
"Gautama said, 'I belong by birth to the Middle country. I live in a
village of hunters. I have married a Sudra spouse who had been a widow.
All this that I tell you is the truth.'
"Bhishma continued, 'The king then began to reflect as to what he should
do. Indeed, the king began to think how he might succeed in acquiring
merit. He said unto himself. 'This man is by birth a, Brahmana. He is,
again a friend of the high-souled Rajadharman. He has been sent to me by
that son of Kasyapa. I must do what is agreeable to my friend. He is very
intimate with me. Indeed, he is my brother, and a dear relative. He is
truly a friend of my heart. On this day of the month of Kartika, a
thousand Brahmanas of the foremost order are to be entertained in my
house. This Gautama also shall be entertained with them and I shall give
wealth unto him too. This is a sacred day. Gautama has come hither as a
guest. The wealth that is to be given away (unto the Brahmanas) is ready.
What is there then to think of?' Just about this time a thousand
Brahmanas, possessed of great learning, with persons purified by baths
and adorned (with sandalpaste and flowers) and attired in long robes of
linen, came to the palace. The Rakshasa king Virupaksha, O monarch,
received the guests, as they came, duly and according to the rites laid
down in the scriptures. At the command of the king, skins were spread out
for them. The royal servants then, O best of the Bharatas, placed mats of
Kusa grass on the ground.[495] Those foremost of Brahmanas, having been
duly worshipped by the king sat down on those seats. The Rakshasa chief
once more worshipped his guests, as provided by the ordinance, with
sesame seeds, green blades of grass, and water. Some amongst them were
selected for representing the Viswedevas, the Pitris, and the deities of
fire. These were smeared with sandal-paste, and flowers were offered unto
them. They were also adored with other kinds of costly offerings. After
such worship, every one of them looked as effulgent as the moon in the
firmament. Then bright and polished plates of gold, adorned with
engravings, and filled with excellent food prepared with ghee and honey,
were given unto those Brahmanas. Every year (on the days of full moon) of
the months of Ashadha and Magha, a large number of Brahmanas used to
receive from the Rakshasa chief, after proper honours, the best kinds of
food that they desired. Especially, on the day of full moon in the month
of Kartika, after the expiry of autumn, the king used to give unto the
Brahmanas much wealth of diverse kinds, including gold, silver, jewels,
gems, pearls, diamonds of great value, stones of the lapis lazuli
variety, deer-skins, and skins of the Ranku deer. Indeed, O Bharata,
throwing a heap of wealth of many kinds for giving it away as Dakshina
(unto his regenerate guests), the mighty Virupaksha, addressing those
foremast of Brahmanas, said unto them, 'Take from these jewels and gems
as much as ye wish and can hope to bear away.' And he also used to say
unto them, O Bharata, these words: 'Taking those plates of gold and
vessels which you have used for your dinner, go ye away, O foremost of
Brahmanas.' When these words were uttered by the high-souled Rakshasa
king (on the occasion of that particular feast), those bulls among
Brahmanas took as much wealth as each desired. Worshipped with those
costly jewels and gems, those best of Brahmanas, attired in excellent
robes, became filled with delight. Once more, the Rakshasa king, having
restrained the Rakshasas that had come to his palace from diverse lands,
addressed those Brahmanas and said, 'This one day, ye regenerate ones, ye
need have no fear from the Rakshasas here. Sport ye as ye wish, and then
go away with speed.' The Brahmanas then, leaving that spot, went away in
all directions with great speed. Gautama also, having taken up a heavy
quantity of gold without any loss of time, went away. Carrying the
burthen with difficulty, he reached that same banian (under which he had
met the crane). He sat himself down, fatigued, toil worn, and hungry.
While Gautama was resting there, that best of birds viz., Rajadharman, O
king, came there. Devoted to friends, he gladdened Gautama by bidding him
welcome. By flapping his wings he began to fan his guest and dispel his
fatigue. Possessed of great intelligence, he worshipped Gautama, and made
arrangements for his food. Having eaten and refreshed himself, Gautama
began to think, 'Heavy is this load that I have taken of bright gold,
moved by covetousness and folly. I have a long way to travel. I have no
food by which to support life on my way. What should I do for supporting
life?' Even these were his thoughts then. It so happened that even upon
much thinking he failed to see any food which he could eat on the way.
Ungrateful as he was, O tiger among men, even this was the thought that
he then conceived, 'This prince of cranes, so large and containing a heap
of flesh, stayeth by my side. Staying and bagging him, I shall leave this
spot and go along with great speed.'"
