SECTION CX
"Yudhishthira said, 'Creatures are seen to be afflicted by diverse means
and almost continually. Tell me, O grandsire, in what way can one
overcome all those difficulties.'
"Bhishma said, 'Those members of the regenerate class that duly practise,
with restrained souls, the duties that have been laid down in the
scriptures for the several modes of life, succeed in overcoming all these
difficulties. They that never practise deceit, they whose behaviour is
restrained by salutary restrictions, and they that control all worldly
desires, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. They that do not speak
when, addressed in evil language, they that do not injure others when
themselves injured, they that give but do not take, succeed in overcoming
all difficulties. They that always give hospitable shelter to guests,
they that do not indulge in malice, they that are constantly engaged in
the study of the Vedas, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. Those
persons who, being conversant with duties, adopt that behaviour towards
parents which they should, they that abstain from sleeping during the
day, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. They that do not commit any
kind of sin in thought, word, and deed, they that never injure any
creature, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. Those kings that do
not, under the influence of passion and covetousness, levy oppressive
taxes, and those that protect their own dominions, succeed in overcoming
all difficulties. They that go to their own wedded wives in season
without seeking the companionship of other women, they that are honest
and attentive to their Agni-hotras, succeed in overcoming all
difficulties. They that are possessed of courage and that, casting away
all fear of death, engage in battle, desirous of victory by fair means,
succeed in overcoming all difficulties. They that always speak truth in
this world even when life is at stake, and that are exemplars for all
creatures to imitate succeed in overcoming all difficulties. They whose
acts never deceive, whose words are always agreeable, and whose wealth is
always well spent, succeed in, overcoming all difficulties. Those
Brahmanas that never study the Vedas at hours not intended for study, and
that practise penances with devotion, succeed in overcoming all
difficulties. Those Brahmanas that betake themselves to a life of
celibacy and Brahmacharya, that perform penances, and that are cleansed
by learning, Vedic knowledge, and proper vows, succeed in overcoming all
difficulties. They that have checked all the qualities that appertain to
Passion and Darkness, that are possessed of high souls, and that practise
the qualities that are called Good, succeed in overcoming all
difficulties. They of whom no creature stands in fear and those that do
not fear any creature themselves, they that look upon all creatures as
their own selves, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. Those bulls
among men that are good, that are never inspired with grief at the sight
of other people's prosperity, and that abstain from all kinds of ignoble
behaviour, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. They that bow to all
the gods, that listen to the doctrines of all creeds, that have faith,
and that are endued with tranquil souls, succeed in overcoming all
difficulties. They that do not desire honour for themselves, that give
honours unto others, that bow down unto those that deserve their worship,
succeed in overcoming all difficulties. They that perform Sraddhas on the
proper lunar days, with pure minds, from desire of offspring, succeed in
overcoming all difficulties. They that restrain their own wrath and
pacify the wrath of others, and that never get angry with any creature,
succeed in overcoming all difficulties. They that abstain, from their
birth, from honey and meat and intoxicating drinks, succeed in overcoming
all difficulties. They that eat for only supporting life, that seek the
companionship of women for the sake only of offspring and that open their
lips for only speaking what is true, succeed in overcoming all
difficulties. They that worship with devotion the god Narayana, that
Supreme Lord of all creatures, that origin and destruction of the
universe, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. This Krishna here, of
eyes red as the lotus, clad in yellow robes, endued with mighty
arms,--this Krishna who is our well-wisher, brother, friend, and
relative,--is Narayana of unfading glory. He covers all the worlds like a
leathern case, at his own pleasure. He is the puissant Lord, of
inconceivable soul. He is Govinda, the foremost of all beings. This
Krishna who is ever engaged in doing what is agreeable and beneficial to
Jishnu, as also to thee, O king, is that foremost of all beings, that
irresistible one, that abode of eternal felicity. They that with devotion
seek the refuge of this Narayana, called also Hari, succeed in overcoming
all difficulties. They that read these verses about the overcoming of
difficulties, that recite them to others, and that speak of them unto
Brahmanas, succeed in overcoming all difficulties. I have now, O sinless
one, told thee all those acts by which men may overcome all difficulties
both here and hereafter.'"
