
SECTION CXLI
"Vaisampayana continued, 'After the expiration, O king, of a year from
this, Dhritarashtra, moved by kindness for the people, installed
Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu, as the heir-apparent of the kingdom on
account of his firmness, fortitude, patience, benevolence, frankness and
unswerving honesty (of heart). And within a short time Yudhishthira, the
son of Kunti, by his good behaviour, manners and close application to
business, overshadowed the deeds of his father. And the second Pandava,
Vrikodara, began to receive continued lessons from Sankarshana (Valarama)
in encounters with the sword and the mace and on the chariot. And after
Bhima's education was finished, he became in strength like unto
Dyumatsena himself and continuing to live in harmony with his brothers,
he began to exert his prowess. And Arjuna became celebrated for the
firmness of his grasp (of weapons), for his lightness of motion,
precision of aim, and his proficiency in the use of the Kshura, Naracha,
Vala and Vipatha weapons, indeed, of all weapons, whether straight or
crooked or heavy. And Drona certified that there was none in the world
who was equal to Arjuna in lightness of hand and general proficiency.
"One day, Drona, addressing Arjuna before the assembled Kaurava princes,
said, 'There was a disciple of Agastya in the science of arms called
Agnivesa. He was my preceptor and I, his disciple. By ascetic merit I
obtained from him a weapon called Brahmasira which could never be futile
and which was like unto thunder itself, capable of consuming the whole
earth. That weapon, O Bharata, from what I have done, may now pass from
disciple to disciple. While imparting it to me, my preceptor said, 'O son
of Bharadwaja, never shouldst thou hurl this weapon at any human being,
especially at one who is of poor energy. Thou hast, O hero, obtained that
celestial weapon. None else deserveth it. But obey the command of the
Rishi (Agnivesa). And, look here, Arjuna, give me now the preceptorial
fee in the presence of these thy cousins and relatives.' When Arjuna, on
hearing this, pledged his word that he would give what the preceptor
demanded, the latter said, 'O sinless one, thou must fight with me when I
fight with thee.' And that bull among the Kuru princes thereupon pledged
his word unto Drona and touching his feet, went away northward. Then
there arose a loud shout covering the whole earth bounded by her belt of
seas to the effect that there was no bowman in the whole world like unto
Arjuna. And, indeed, Dhananjaya, in encounters with the mace and the
sword and on the chariot as also with the bow, acquired wonderful
proficiency. Sahadeva obtained the whole science of morality and duties
from (Vrihaspati) the spiritual chief of celestials, and continued to
live under the control of his brothers. And Nakula, the favourite of his
brothers taught by Drona, became known as a skilful warrior and a great
car-warrior (Ati-ratha). Indeed, Arjuna and the other Pandava princes
became so powerful that they slew in battle the great Sauvira who had
performed a sacrifice extending over three years, undaunted by the raids
of the Gandharvas. And the king of the Yavanas himself whom the powerful
Pandu even had failed to bring under subjection was brought by Arjuna
under control. Then again Vipula, the king of the Sauviras, endued with
great prowess, who had always shown a disregard for the Kurus, was made
by the intelligent Arjuna to feel the edge of his power. And Arjuna also
repressed by means of his arrows (the pride of) king Sumitra of Sauvira,
also known by the name of Dattamitra who had resolutely sought an
encounter with him. The third of the Pandava princes, assisted by Bhima,
on only a single car subjugated all the kings of the East backed by ten
thousand cars. In the same way, having conquered on a single car the
whole of the south, Dhananjaya sent unto the kingdom of the Kurus a large
booty.
"Thus did those foremost of men, the illustrious Pandavas, conquering the
territories of other kings, extend the limits of their own kingdom. But
beholding the great prowess and strength of those mighty bowmen, king
Dhritarashtra's sentiments towards the Pandavas became suddenly poisoned,
and from that day the monarch became so anxious that he could hardly
sleep.'"
