
SECTION CXLVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Meanwhile the Pandavas got into their cars, yoking
thereto some fine horses endued with the speed of wind. While they were
on the point of entering their cars, they touched, in great sorrow, the
feet of Bhishma, of king Dhritarashtra, of the illustrious Drona, of
Kripa, of Vidura and of the other elders of the Kuru race. Then saluting
with reverence all the older men, and embracing their equals, receiving
the farewell of even the children, and taking leave of all the venerable
ladies in their household, and walking round them respectfully, and
bidding farewell unto all the citizens, the Pandavas, ever mindful of
their vows, set out for Varanavata. And Vidura of great wisdom and the
other bulls among the Kurus and the citizens also, from great affliction,
followed those tigers among men to some distance. And some amongst the
citizens and the country people, who followed the Pandavas, afflicted
beyond measure at beholding the sons of Pandu in such distress, began to
say aloud, 'King Dhritarashtra of wicked soul seeth no things with the
same eye. The Kuru monarch casteth not his eye on virtue. Neither the
sinless Yudhishthira, nor Bhima the foremost of mighty men, nor
Dhananjaya the (youngest) son of Kunti, will ever be guilty (of the sin
of waging a rebellious war). When these will remain quiet, how shall the
illustrious son of Madri do anything? Having inherited the kingdom from
their father, Dhritarashtra could not bear them. How is that Bhishma who
suffers the exile of the Pandavas to that wretched place, sanctions this
act of great injustice? Vichitravirya, the son of Santanu, and the royal
sage Pandu of Kuru's race both cherished us of old with fatherly care.
But now that Pandu that tiger among men, hath ascended to heaven,
Dhritarashtra cannot bear with these princes his children. We who do not
sanction this exile shall all go, leaving this excellent town and our own
homes, where Yudhishthira will go.'
"Unto those distressed citizens talking in this way, the virtuous
Yudhishthira, himself afflicted with sorrow, reflecting for a few moments
said, 'The king is our father, worthy of regard, our spiritual guide, and
our superior. To carry out with unsuspicious hearts whatever he biddeth,
is indeed, our duty. Ye are our friends. Walking round us and making us
happy by your blessings, return ye to your abodes. When the time cometh
for anything to be done for us by you, then, indeed, accomplish all that
is agreeable and beneficial to us.' Thus addressed, the citizens walked
round the Pandavas and blessed them with their blessings and returned to
their respective abodes.
"And after the citizens had ceased following the Pandavas, Vidura,
conversant with all the dictates of morality, desirous of awakening the
eldest of the Pandavas (to a sense of his dangers), addressed him in
these words. The learned Vidura, conversant with the jargon (of the
Mlechchhas), addressed the learned Yudhishthira who also was conversant
with the same jargon, in the words of the Mlechchha tongue, so as to be
unintelligible to all except Yudhishthira. He said, 'He that knoweth the
schemes his foes contrive in accordance with the dictates of political
science, should, knowing them, act in such a way as to avoid all danger.
He that knoweth that there are sharp weapons capable of cutting the body
though not made of steel, and understandeth also the means of warding
them off, can never be injured by foes. He liveth who protecteth himself
by the knowledge that neither the consumer of straw and wood nor the
drier of the dew burneth the inmates of a hole in the deep woods. The
blind man seeth not his way: the blind man hath no knowledge of
direction. He that hath no firmness never acquireth prosperity.
Remembering this, be upon your guard. The man who taketh a weapon not
made of steel (i.e., an inflammable abode) given him by his foes, can
escape from fire by making his abode like unto that of a jackal (having
many outlets). By wandering a man may acquire the knowledge of ways, and
by the stars he can ascertain the direction, and he that keepeth his five
(senses) under control can never be oppressed y his enemies.'
"Thus addressed, Pandu's son, Yudhishthira the just replied unto Vidura,
that foremost of all learned men, saying, 'I have understood thee.' Then
Vidura, having instructed the Pandavas and followed them (thus far),
walked around them and bidding them farewell returned to his own abode.
When the citizens and Bhishma and Vidura had all ceased following, Kunti
approached Yudhishthira and said, 'The words that Kshattri said unto thee
in the midst of many people so indistinctly as if he did not say
anything, and thy reply also to him in similar words and voice, we have
not understood. If it is not improper; for us to know them I should then
like to hear everything that had passed between him and thee.'
"Yudhishthira replied, 'The virtuous Vidura said unto me that we should
know that the mansion (for our accommodation at Varanavata) hath been
built of inflammable materials. He said unto me, 'The path of escape too
shall not be unknown to thee,'--and further,--'Those that can control
their senses can acquire the sovereignty of the whole world.'--The reply
that I gave unto Vidura was, 'I have understood thee.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The Pandavas set out on the eighth day of the
month of Phalguna when the star Rohini was in the ascendant, and arriving
at Varanavata they beheld the town and the people.'"
