
SECTION CXLVIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then all the citizens (of Varanavata) on hearing
that the son of Pandu had come, were filled with joy at the tidings,
speedily came out of Varanavata, in vehicles of various kinds numbering
by thousands, taking with them every auspicious article as directed by
the Sastras, for receiving those foremost of men. And the people of
Varanavata, approaching the sons of Kunti blessed them by uttering the
Jaya and stood surrounding them. That tiger among men, viz., the virtuous
Yudhishthira thus surrounded by them looked resplendent like him having
the thunderbolt in his hands (viz., Indra) in the midst of the
celestials. And those sinless ones, welcomed by the citizens and
welcoming the citizens in return, then entered the populous town of
Varanavata decked with every ornament. Entering the town those heroes
first went, O monarch, to the abodes of Brahmanas engaged in their proper
duties. Those foremost of men then went to the abodes of the officials of
the town, and then of the Sutas and the Vaisyas and then to those of even
the Sudras, O bull of Bharata's race, thus adored by the citizens, the
Pandavas at last went with Purochana going before them, to the palace
that had been built for them, Purochana then began to place before them
food and drink and beds and carpets, all of the first and most agreeable
order. The Pandavas attired in costly robes, continued to live there,
adored by Purochana and the people having their homes in Varanavata.
"After the Pandavas had thus lived for ten nights, Purochana spoke to
them of the mansion (he had built) called 'The Blessed Home,' but in
reality the cursed house. Then those tigers among men, attired in costly
dress, entered that mansion at the instance of Purochana like Guhyakas
entering the palace (of Siva) on the Kailasa mount. The foremost of all
virtuous men, Yudhishthira, inspecting the house, said unto Bhima that it
was really built of inflammable materials. Smelling the scent of fat
mixed with clarified butter and preparations of lac, he said unto Bhima,
'O chastiser of foes, this house is truly built of inflammable materials!
Indeed, it is apparent that such is the case! The enemy, it is evident,
by the aid of trusted artists well-skilled in the construction of houses,
have finely built this mansion, after procuring hemp, resin, heath,
straw, and bamboos, all soaked in clarified butter. This wicked wretch,
Purochana, acting under the instruction of Duryodhana, stayeth here with
the object of burning me to death when he seeth me trustful. But, O son
of Pritha, Vidura of great intelligence, knew of this danger, and,
therefore, hath warned me of it beforehand. Knowing it all, that youngest
uncle of ours, ever wishing our good from affection hath told us that
this house, so full of danger, hath been constructed by the wretches
under Duryodhana acting in secrecy.'
"Hearing this, Bhima replied, 'If, sir, you know this house to be so
inflammable, it would then be well for us to return thither where we had
taken up our quarters first.' Yudhishthira replied, 'It seems to me that
we should rather continue to live here in seeming unsuspiciousness but
all the while with caution and our senses wide awake and seeking for some
certain means of escape. If Purochana findeth from our countenances that
we have fathomed designs, acting with haste he may suddenly burn us to
death. Indeed, Purochana careth little for obloquy or sin. The wretch
stayeth here acting under the instruction of Duryodhana. If we are burnt
to death, will our grandfather Bhishma be angry? Why will he, by showing
his wrath, make the Kauravas angry with him? Or, perhaps, our grandfather
Bhishma and the other bull of Kuru's race, regarding indignation at such
a sinful act to be virtuous, may become wrathful. If however, from fear
of being burnt, we fly from here, Duryodhana, ambitious of sovereignty
will certainly compass our death by means of spies. While we have no rank
and power, Duryodhana hath both; while we have no friends and allies,
Duryodhana hath both; while we are without wealth, Duryodhana hath at his
command a full treasury. Will he not, therefore, certainly destroy us by
adopting adequate means? Let us, therefore, by deceiving this wretch
(Purochana) and that other wretch Duryodhana, pass our days, disguising
ourselves at times. Let us also lead a hunting life, wandering over the
earth. We shall then, if we have to escape our enemies, be familiar with
all paths. We shall also, this very day, cause a subterranean passage to
be dug in our chamber in great secrecy. If we act in this way, concealing
what we do from all, fire shall never be able to consume us. We shall
live here, actively doing everything for our safety but with such privacy
that neither Purochana nor any of the citizens of Varanavata may know
what we are after.'"
