
SECTION CXLIX
"Vaisampayana continued, 'A friend of Vidura's, well-skilled in mining,
coming unto the Pandavas, addressed them in secret, saying, 'I have been
sent by Vidura and am a skilful miner. I am to serve the Pandavas. Tell
me what I am to do for ye. From the trust he reposeth in me Vidura hath
said unto me, 'Go thou unto the Pandavas and accomplish thou their good.
What shall I do for you? Purochana will set fire to the door of thy house
on the fourteenth night of this dark fortnight. To burn to death those
tigers among men, the Pandavas, with their mother, is the design of that
wicked wretch, the son of Dhritarashtra. O son of Pandu, Vidura also told
thee something in the Mlechchha tongue to which thou also didst reply in
same language. I state these particulars as my credentials.' Hearing
these words, Yudhishthira, the truthful son of Kunti replied, 'O amiable
one, I now know thee as a dear and trusted friend of Vidura, true and
ever devoted to him. There is nothing that the learned Vidura doth not
know. As his, so ours art thou. Make no difference between him and us. We
are as much thine as his. O, protect us as the learned Vidura ever
protecteth us. I know that this house, so inflammable, hath been
contrived for me by Purochana at the command of Dhritarashtra's son. That
wicked wretch commanding wealth and allies pursueth us without
intermission. O, save us with a little exertion from the impending
conflagration. If we are burnt to death here, Duryodhana's most cherished
desire will be satisfied. Here is that wretch's well-furnished arsenal.
This large mansion hath been built abutting the high ramparts of the
arsenal without any outlet. But this unholy contrivance of Duryodhana was
known to Vidura from the first, and he it was who enlightened us
beforehand. The danger of which Kshattri had foreknowledge is now at our
door. Save us from it without Purochana's knowledge thereof.' On hearing
these words, the miner said, 'So be it,' and carefully beginning his work
of excavation, made a large subterranean passage. And the mouth of that
passage was in the centre of that house, and it was on a level with the
floor and closed up with planks. The mouth was so covered from fear of
Purochana, that wicked wretch who kept a constant watch at the door of
the house. The Pandavas used to sleep within their chambers with arms
ready for use, while, during the day, they went a-hunting from forest to
forest. Thus, O king, they lived (in that mansion) very guardedly,
deceiving Purochana by a show of trustfulness and contentment while in
reality they were trustless and discontented. Nor did the citizens of
Varanavata know anything about these plans of the Pandavas. In fact, none
else knew of them except Vidura's friend, that good miner.'"
