
SECTION CXLIII
(Jatugriha Parva)
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then the son of Suvala (Sakuni), king Duryodhana,
Duhsasana and Kama, in consultation with one another, formed an evil
conspiracy. With the sanction of Dhritarashtra, the king of the Kurus,
they resolved to burn to death Kunti and her (five) sons. But that wise
Vidura, capable of reading the heart by external signs, ascertained the
intention of these wicked persons by observing their countenances alone.
Then the sinless Vidura, of soul enlightened by true knowledge, and
devoted to the good of the Pandavas, came to the conclusion that Kunti
with her children should fly away from her foes. And providing for that
purpose a boat strong enough to withstand both wind and wave, he
addressed Kunti and said, 'This Dhritarashtra hath been born for
destroying the fame and offspring of the (Kuru) race. Of wicked soul, he
is about to cast off eternal virtue. O blessed one, I have kept ready on
the stream a boat capable of withstanding both wind and wave. Escape by
it with thy children from the net that death hath spread around you.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words, the illustrious Kunti was
deeply grieved, and with her children, O bull of Bharata's race, stepped
into the boat and went over the Ganges. Then leaving the boat according
to the advice of Vidura, the Pandavas took with them the wealth that had
been given to them (while at Varanavata) by their enemies and safely
entered the deep woods. In the house of lac, however, that had been
prepared for the destruction of the Pandavas, an innocent Nishada woman
who had come there for some purpose, was, with her children burnt to
death. And that worst of Mlechchhas, the wretched Purochana (who was the
architect employed in building the house of lac) was also burnt in the
conflagration. And thus were the sons of Dhirtarashtra with their
counsellors deceived in their expectations. And thus also were the
illustrious Pandavas, by the advice of Vidura, saved with their mother.
But the people (of Varanavata) knew not of their safety. And the citizens
of Varanavata, seeing the house of lac consumed (and believing the
Pandavas to have been burnt to death) became exceedingly sorry. And they
sent messengers unto king Dhritarashtra to represent everything that had
happened. And they said to the monarch, 'Thy great end hath been
achieved! Thou hast at last burnt the Pandavas to death! Thy desire
fulfilled, enjoy with thy children. O king of the Kurus, the kingdom.'
Hearing this, Dhritarashtra with his children, made a show of grief, and
along with his relatives, including Kshattri (Vidura) and Bhishma the
foremost of the Kurus, performed the last honours of the Pandavas.'
"Janamejaya said, 'O best of Brahmanas, I desire to hear in full this
history of the burning of the house of lac and the escape of the Pandavas
there from. That was a cruel act of theirs (the Kurus), acting under the
counsels of the wicked (Kanika). Recite the history to me of all that
happened. I am burning with curiosity to hear it.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'O chastiser of all foes, listen to me, O monarch, as
I recite the (history of the) burning of the house of lac and the escape
of the Pandavas. The wicked Duryodhana, beholding Bhimasena surpass
(everybody) in strength and Arjuna highly accomplished in arms became
pensive and sad. Then Karna, the offspring of the Sun, and Sakuni, the
son of Suvala, endeavoured by various means to compass the death of the
Pandavas. The Pandavas too counteracted all those contrivances one after
another, and in obedience to the counsels of Vidura, never spoke of them
afterwards. Then the citizens, beholding the son of Pandu possessed of
accomplishments, began, O Bharata, to speak of them in all places of
public resort. And assembled in courtyards and other places of gathering,
they talked of the eldest son of Pandu (Yudhishthira) as possessed of the
qualifications for ruling the kingdom. And they said, 'Dhritarashtra,
though possessed of the eye of knowledge, having been (born) blind, had
not obtained the kingdom before. How can he (therefore) become king now?
Then Bhishma, the son of Santanu, of rigid vows and devoted to truth,
having formerly relinquished the sovereignty would never accept it now.
We shall, therefore, now install (on the throne) with proper ceremonies
the eldest of the Pandavas endued with youth, accomplished in battle,
versed in the Vedas, and truthful and kind. Worshipping Bhishma, the son
of Santanu and Dhritarashtra conversant with the rules of morality, he
will certainly maintain the former and the latter with his children in
every kind of enjoyment.
"The wretched Duryodhana, hearing these words of the parting partisans of
Yudhishthira, became very much distressed. Deeply afflicted, the wicked
prince could not put up with those speeches. Inflamed with jealousy, he
went unto Dhritarashtra, and finding him alone he saluted him with
reverence and distressed at (the sight of) the partiality of the citizens
for Yudhishthira, he addressed the monarch and said, 'O father, I have
heard the parting citizens utter words of ill omen. Passing thee by, and
Bhishma too, they desire the son of Pandu to be their king. Bhishma will
sanction this, for he will not rule the kingdom. It seems, therefore,
that the citizens are endeavouring to inflict a great injury on us. Pandu
obtained of old the ancestral kingdom by virtue of his own
accomplishments, but thou, from blindness, didst not obtain the kingdom,
though fully qualified to have it. If Pandu's son now obtaineth the
kingdom as his inheritance from Pandu, his son will obtain it after him
and that son's son also, and so on will it descend in Pandu's line. In
that case, O king of the world, ourselves with our children, excluded
from the royal line, shall certainly be disregarded by all men.
Therefore, O monarch, adopt such counsels that we may not suffer
perpetual distress, becoming dependent on others for our food. O king, if
thou hadst obtained the sovereignty before, we would certainly have
succeeded to it, however much the people might be unfavourable to us.'"
