
SECTION CXL
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Beholding the Pandavas and the son of
Dhritarashtra accomplished in arms, Drona thought the time had come when
he could demand the preceptorial fee. And, O king, assembling his pupils
one day together, the preceptor Drona asked of them the fee, saying,
'Seize Drupada, the king of Panchala in battle and bring him unto me.
That shall be the most acceptable fee.' Those warriors then answering,
'So be it', speedily mounted up on their chariots, and for bestowing upon
their preceptor the fee he had demanded, marched out, accompanied by him.
Those bulls among men, smiting the Panchalas on their way, laid siege to
the capital of the great Drupada. And Duryodhana and Karna and the mighty
Yuyutsu, and Duhsasana and Vikarna and Jalasandha and Sulochana,--these
and many other foremost of Kshatriya princes of great prowess, vied with
one another in becoming the foremost in the attack. And the princes,
riding in first class chariots and following the cavalry, entered the
hostile capital, and proceeded along the streets.
"Meanwhile, the king of Panchala, beholding that mighty force and hearing
its loud clamour, came out of his palace, accompanied by his brothers.
Though king Yajnasena was well-armed, the Kuru army assailed him with a
shower of arrows, uttering their war-cry. Yajnasena, however, not easy to
be subdued in battle, approaching the Kurus upon his white chariot, began
to rain his fierce arrows around.
"Before the battle commenced, Arjuna, beholding the pride of prowess
displayed by the princes, addressed his preceptor, that best of
Brahmanas, Drona, and said, 'We shall exert ourselves after these have
displayed their prowess. The king of Panchala can never be taken on the
field of the battle by any of these. Having said this, the sinless son of
Kunti surrounded by his brothers, waited outside the town at a distance
of a mile from it. Meanwhile Drupada beholding the Kuru host, rushed
forward and pouring a fierce shower of arrows around, terribly afflicted
the Kuru ranks. And such was his lightness of motion on the field of
battle that, though he was fighting unsupported on a single chariot, the
Kurus from panic supposed that there were many Drupadas opposed to them.
And the fierce arrows of that monarch fell fast on all sides, till conchs
and trumpets and drums by thousands began to be sounded by the Panchalas
from their houses (giving the alarm). Then there arose from the mighty
Panchala host a roar terrible as that of the lion, while the twang of
their bow-strings seemed to rend the very heavens. Then Duryodhana and
Vikarna, Suvahu and Dirghalochana and Duhsasana becoming furious, began
to shower their arrows upon the enemy. But the mighty bowman, Prishata's
son, invincible in battle, though very much pierced with the arrows of
the enemy, instantly began, O Bharata, to afflict the hostile ranks with
greater vigour. And careering over the field of battle like a fiery
wheel, king Drupada with his arrows smote Duryodhana and Vikarna and even
the mighty Karna and many other heroic princes and numberless warriors,
and slaked their thirst for battle. Then all the citizens showered upon
the Kurus various missiles like clouds showering rain-drops upon the
earth. Young and old, they all rushed to battle, assailing the Kurus with
vigour. The Kauravas, then, O Bharata, beholding the battle become
frightful, broke and fled wailing towards the Pandavas.
"The Pandavas, hearing the terrible wail of the beaten host,
reverentially saluted Drona and ascended their chariots. Then Arjuna
hastily bidding Yudhishthira not to engage in the fight, rushed forward,
appointing the sons of Madri (Nakula and Sahadeva) the protectors of his
chariot-wheels, while Bhimasena ever fighting in the van, mace in hand,
ran ahead. The sinless Arjuna, thus accompanied by his brothers, hearing
the shouts of the enemy, advanced towards them, filling the whole region
with the rattle of his chariot-wheels. And like a Makara entering the
sea, the mighty-armed Bhima, resembling a second Yama, mace in hand,
entered the Panchala ranks, fiercely roaring like the ocean in a tempest.
And Bhima, mace in hand, first rushed towards the array of elephants in
the hostile force, while Arjuna, proficient in battle, assailed that
force with the prowess of his arms. And Bhima, like the great Destroyer
himself, began to slay those elephants with his mace. Those huge animals,
like unto mountains, struck with Bhima's mace, had their heads broken
into pieces. Covered with stream of blood, they began to fall upon the
ground like cliffs loosened by thunder. And the Pandavas prostrated on
the ground elephants and horses and cars by thousands and slew many
foot-soldiers and many car-warriors. Indeed, as a herdsman in the woods
driveth before him with his staff countless cattle with ease, so did
Vrikodara drive before him the chariots and elephants of the hostile
force.
"Meanwhile, Phalguna, impelled by the desire of doing good unto
Bharadwaja's son, assailed the son of Prishata with a shower of arrows
and felled him from the elephant on which he was seated. And, O monarch,
Arjuna, like unto the terrible fire that consumeth all things at the end
of the Yuga, began to prostrate on the ground horses and cars and
elephants by thousands. The Panchalas and the Srinjayas, on the other
hand, thus assailed by the Pandava, met him with a perfect shower of
weapons of various kinds. And they sent up a loud shout and fought
desperately with Arjuna. The battle became furious and terrible to
behold. Hearing the enemy's shouts, the son of Indra was filled with
wrath and assailing the hostile host with a thick shower of arrows,
rushed towards it furiously afflicting it with renewed vigour. They who
observed the illustrious Arjuna at that time could not mark any interval
between his fixing the arrows on the bowstring and letting them off. Loud
were the shouts that rose there, mingled with cheers of approval. Then
the king of the Panchalas, accompanied by (the generalissimo of his
forces) Satyajit, rushed with speed at Arjuna like the Asura Samvara
rushing at the chief of the celestials (in days of yore). Then Arjuna
covered the king of Panchala with a shower of arrows. Then there arose a
frightful uproar among the Panchala host like unto the roar of a mighty
lion springing at the leader of a herd of elephants. And beholding Arjuna
rushing at the king of Panchala to seize him, Satyajit of great prowess
rushed at him. And the two warriors, like unto Indra and the Asura
Virochana's son (Vali), approaching each other for combat, began to grind
each other's ranks. Then Arjuna with great force pierced Satyajit with
ten keen shafts at which feat the spectators were all amazed. But
Satyajit, without losing any time, assailed Arjuna with a hundred shafts.
Then that mighty car-warrior, Arjuna, endued with remarkable lightness of
motion, thus covered by that shower of arrows, rubbed his bow-string to
increase the force and velocity of his shafts. Then cutting in twain his
antagonist's bow, Arjuna rushed at the king of the Panchalas, but
Satyajit, quickly taking up a tougher bow, pierced with his arrows
Partha, his chariot, charioteer, and horses. Arjuna, thus assailed in
battle by the Panchala warrior, forgave not his foe. Eager to slay him at
once, he pierced with a number of arrows his antagonist's horses, flags,
bow, clenched (left) fist, charioteer, and the attendant at his back.
Then Satyajit, finding his bows repeatedly cut in twain and his horses
slain, desisted from the fight.
"The king of the Panchalas, beholding his general thus discomfited in the
encounter, himself began to shower his arrows upon the Pandava prince.
Then Arjuna, that foremost of warriors, crowned with success, began to
fight furiously, and quickly cutting his enemy's bow in twain as also his
flagstaff which he caused to fall down, pierced his antagonist's horses,
and charioteer also with five arrows. Then throwing aside his bow Arjuna
took his quiver, and taking out a scimitar and sending forth a loud
shout, leaped from his own chariot upon that of his foe. And standing
there with perfect fearlessness he seized Drupada as Garuda seizeth a
huge snake after agitating the waters of the ocean. At the sight of this,
the Panchala troops ran away in all directions.
"Then Dhananjaya, having thus exhibited the might of his arm in the
presence of both hosts, sent forth a loud shout and came out of the
Panchala ranks. And beholding him returning (with his captive), the
princes began to lay waste Drupada's capital. Addressing them Arjuna
said, 'This best of monarchs, Drupada, is a relative of the Kuru heroes.
Therefore, O Bhima, slay not his soldiers. Let us only give unto our
preceptor his fee.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'O king, thus prevented by Arjuna, the mighty
Bhimasena, though unsatiated with the exercise of battle, refrained from
the act of slaughter. And, O bull of the Bharata race, the princes then,
taking Drupada with them after having seized him on the field of battle
along with his friends and counsellors, offered him unto Drona. And Drona
beholding Drupada thus brought under complete control--humiliated and
deprived of wealth--remembered that monarch's former hostility and
addressing him said, 'Thy kingdom and capital have been laid waste by me.
But fear not for thy life, though it dependeth now on the will of thy
foe. Dost thou now desire to revive thy friendship (with me)?' Having
said this, he smiled a little and again said, 'Fear not for thy life,
brave king! We, Brahmanas, are ever forgiving. And, O bull among
Kshatriyas, my affection and love for thee have grown with me in
consequence of our having sported together in childhood in the hermitage.
Therefore, O king, I ask for thy friendship again. And as a boon
(unasked), I give thee half the kingdom (that was thine). Thou toldest me
before that none who was not a king could be a king's friend. Therefore
is it, O Yajnasena, that I retain half thy kingdom. Thou art the king of
all the territory lying on the southern side of the Bhagirathi, while I
become king of all the territory on the north of that river. And, O
Panchala, if it pleaseth thee, know me hence for thy friend.'
"On hearing these words, Drupada answered, 'Thou art of noble soul and
great prowess. Therefore, O Brahmana, I am not surprised at what thou
doest. I am very much gratified with thee, and I desire thy eternal
friendship.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'After this, O Bharata, Drona released the king
of Panchala, and cheerfully performing the usual offices of regard,
bestowed upon him half the kingdom. Thenceforth Drupada began to reside
sorrowfully in (the city of) Kampilya within (the province of) Makandi on
the banks of the Ganga filled with many towns and cities. And after his
defeat by Drona, Drupada also ruled the southern Panchalas up to the bank
of the Charmanwati river. And Drupada from that day was well-convinced
that he could not, by Kshatriya might alone, defeat Drona, being very
much his inferior in Brahma (spiritual) power. And he, therefore, began
to wander over the whole earth to find out the means of obtaining a son
(who would subjugate his Brahmana foe).
"Meanwhile Drona continued to reside in Ahicchatra. Thus, O king, was the
territory of Ahicchatra full of towns and cities, obtained by Arjuna, and
bestowed upon Drona.'
