SECTION CCXXI
"Yudhishthira said, 'The three regenerate classes, who are given to
sacrifices and other rites, sometimes eat the remnants, consisting of
meat and wine, of sacrifices in honour of the deities, from motives of
obtaining children and heaven. What, O grandsire, is the character of
this act?'
"Bhishma said, 'Those who eat forbidden food without being observant of
the sacrifices and vows ordained in the Vedas are regarded as wilful men.
(They are regarded as fallen even here). Those, on the other hand, who
eat such food in the observance of Vedic sacrifices and vows and induced
by the desire of fruits in the shape of heaven and children, ascend to
heaven but fall down on the exhaustion of their merits.'[831]
"Yudhishthira said, 'Common people say that fasting is tapas (penances).
Is fasting, however, really so, or is penance something different?'
"Bhishma said, 'People do regard fast, measured by months or fortnights
or days, as penance. In the opinion, however of the good, such is not
penance. On the other hand, fast is an impediment to the acquisition of
the knowledge of the Soul.[832] The renunciation of acts (that is so
difficult for all) and humility (consisting in the worship of all
creatures and consideration for them all) constitute the highest penance.
That is distinguished above all kinds of penance. He who betakes himself
to such penance is regarded as one that is always fasting and that is
always leading a life of Brahmacharya. Such a Brahmana will become a Muni
always, a deity evermore, and sleepless forever, and one engaged in the
pursuit of virtue only, even if he lives in the bosom of a family. He
will become a vegetarian always, and pure for ever. He will become an
eater always of ambrosia, and an adorer always of gods and guests.
Indeed, he will be regarded as one always subsisting on sacrificial
remnants, as one ever devoted to the duty of hospitality, as one always
full of faith, and as one ever worshipping gods and guests.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'How can one practising such penance come to be
regarded as one that is always fasting or as one that is ever devoted to
the vow of Brahmacharya, or as one that is always subsisting upon
sacrificial remnants or as one that is ever regardful of guests?'
"Bhishma said, 'He will be regarded as one that is always fasting if he
eats once during the day and once during the night at the fixed hours
without eating anything during the interval. Such a Brahmana, by always
speaking the truth and by adhering always to wisdom, and by going to his
wife only in her season and never at other times, becomes a Brahmacharin
(celibate). By never eating meat of animals not killed for sacrifice, he
will become a strict vegetarian. By always becoming charitable he will
become ever pure, and by abstaining from sleep during the day he will
become one that is always wakeful. Know, O Yudhishthira, that that man
who eats only after having fed his servants and guests becomes an eater
always of ambrosia. That Brahmana who never eats till gods and guests are
fed, wins, by such abstention, heaven itself. He is said to subsist upon
sacrificial remnants, who eats only what remains after feeding the gods,
the Pitris, servants, and guests. Such men win numberless regions of
felicity in next life. To their homes come, with Brahman himself, the
gods and the Apsaras. They who share their food with the deities and the
Pitris pass their days in constant happiness with their sons and
grandsons and at last, leaving off this body, attain to a very high end.'"
