SECTION CCXX
"Yudhishthira said, 'By doing what does one acquire happiness, and what
is that by doing which one meets with woe? What also is that, O Bharata,
by doing which one becomes freed from fear and sojourns here crowned with
success (in respect of the objects of life)?'
"Bhishma said, 'The ancients who had their understandings directed to the
Srutis, highly applauded the duty of self-restraint for all the orders
generally but for the. Brahmanas in especial. Success in respect of
religious rites never occurs in the case of one that is not
self-restrained. Religious rites, penances, truth,--all these are
established upon self-restraint. Self-restraint enhances one's energy.
Self-restraint is said to be sacred. The man of self-restraint becomes
sinless and fearless and wins great results. One that is self-restrained
sleeps happily and wakes happily. He sojourns happily in the world and
his mind always remains cheerful. Every kind of excitement is quietly
controlled by self-restraint. One that is not self-restrained fails in a
similar endeavour. The man of self-restraint beholds his innumerable foes
(in the form of lust, desire, and wrath, etc.), as if these dwell in a
separate body. Like tigers and other carnivorous beasts, persons
destitute of self-restraint always inspire all creatures with dread. For
controlling these men, the Self-born (Brahman) created kings. In all the
(four) modes of life, the practice or self-restraint is distinguished
above all other virtues. The fruits of self-restraint are much greater
than those obtainable in all the modes of life. I shall now mention to
thee the indications of those persons who prize self-restraint
highly.[829] They are nobility, calmness of disposition, contentment,
faith, forgiveness, invariable simplicity, the absence of garrulity,
humility, reverence for superiors, benevolence, compassion for all
creatures, frankness, abstention from talk upon kings and men in
authority, from all false and useless discourses, and from applause and
censure of others. The self-restrained man becomes desirous of
emancipation and, quietly bearing present joys and griefs, is never
exhilarated or depressed by prospective ones. Destitute of vindictiveness
and all kinds of guile, and unmoved by praise and blame, such a man is
well-behaved, has good manners, is pure of soul, has firmness or
fortitude, and is a complete master of his passions. Receiving honours in
this world, such a man in afterlife goes to heaven. Causing all creatures
to acquire what they cannot acquire without his aid, such a man rejoices
and becomes happy.[830] Devoted to universal benevolence, such a man
never cherishes animosity for any one. Tranquil like the ocean at a dead
calm, wisdom fills his soul and he is never cheerful. Possessed of
intelligence, and deserving of universal reverence, the man of
self-restraint never cherishes fear of any creature and is feared by no
creature in return. That man who never rejoices even at large
acquisitions and never feels sorrow when overtaken by calamity, is said
to be possessed of contented wisdom. Such a man is said to be
self-restrained. Indeed, such a man is said to be a regenerate being.
Versed with the scriptures and endued with a pure soul, the man of
self-restraint, accomplishing all those acts that are done by the good,
enjoys their high fruits. They, however, that are of wicked soul never
betake themselves to the path represented by benevolence, forgiveness,
tranquillity, contentment, sweetness of speech, truth, liberality and
comfort. Their path consists of lust and wrath and cupidity and envy of
others and boastfulness. Subjugating lust and wrath, practising the vow
of Brahmacharya and becoming a complete master of his senses, the
Brahmana, exerting himself with endurance in the austerest of penances,
and observing the most rigid restraints, should live in this world,
calmly waiting for his time like one seeming to have a body though fully
knowing that he is not subject to destruction.'"
