11
Vaishampayana said, "Dhritarashtra had not proceeded for more than two
miles when he met with those three great car-warriors, Sharadvatas son
Kripa, Dronas son (Ashvatthama), and Kritavarma. As soon as the latter
obtained a sight of the blind monarch possessed of great power, the three
heroes sighed in grief and with voices choked in tears weepingly
addressed him, saying, Thy royal son, O king, having achieved the most
difficult feats, has, with all his followers, gone to the region of
Indra. We are the only three car-warriors of Duryodhanas army that have
escaped with life. All the others, O bull of Bharatas race, have
perished. Having said these words unto the king, Sharadvatas son Kripa,
addressing the grief-afflicted Gandhari, said these words unto her, Thy
sons have fallen while engaged in achieving feats worthy of heroes, while
fearlessly fighting in battle and striking down large numbers of foes.
Without doubt, having obtained those bright worlds that are attainable
only by the use of weapons, they are sporting there like celestials,
having assumed resplendent forms. Amongst those heroes there was no one
that turned back from battle. Every one of them has fallen at the end or
edge of weapons. None of them joined his hands, begging for quarter.
Death in battle at the end or edge of weapons has been said by the
ancients to be the highest end that a Kshatriya can obtain. It behoveth
thee not, therefore, to grieve for any of them. Their foes, O queen, the
Pandavas, too, have not been more fortunate. Listen, what we, headed by
Ashvatthama, have done unto them. Learning that thy son had been slain
unrighteously by Bhima, we slaughtered the Pandavas after entering their
camp buried in sleep. All the Pancalas have been slain. Indeed, all the
sons of Drupada, as also all the sons of Draupadi, have been slaughtered.
Having caused this carnage of the sons of our foes, we are flying away
since we three are incapable of standing in battle with them. Our foes,
the Pandavas, are all heroes and mighty bowmen. They will soon come up
with us, filled with rage, for taking vengeance on us. Hearing the
slaughter of their sons, those bulls among men, infuriated with rage,
those heroes, O illustrious lady, will speedily pursue our track. Having
caused a carnage (in their sleeping camp) we dare not stay. Grant us
permission, O queen! It behoveth thee not to set thy heart on sorrow.
Grant us thy permission also, O king! Summon all thy fortitude. Do thou
also observe the duties of a Kshatriya in their highest form. Having said
these words unto the king, and circumambulating him, Kripa and Kritavarma
and Dronas son, O Bharata, without being able to withdraw their eyes from
king Dhritarashtra possessed of great wisdom, urged their steeds towards
the banks of the Ganga. Moving away from that spot, O king, those great
car-warriors, with hearts plunged in anxiety, took one anothers leave and
separated from one another. Sharadvatas son, Kripa, went to Hastinapura;
Hridikas son repaired to his own kingdom; while the son of Drona set for
the asylum of Vyasa. Even thus those heroes, who had offended the
high-souled sons of Pandu, respectively proceeded to the places they
selected, afflicted with fear and casting their eyes on one another.
Having met the king thus, those brave chastisers of foes, before the sun
rose, went away, O monarch, to the places they chose. It was after this,
O king, that the sons of Pandu, those great car-warriors, encountered the
son of Drona, and putting forth their prowess, vanquished him, O monarch,
(in the way already related)."
