12
Vaishampayana said, "After all the warriors had been slaughtered, king
Yudhishthira the just heard that his uncle Dhritarashtra had set out from
the city called after the elephant. Afflicted with grief on account of
the death of his sons, Yudhishthira, O king, accompanied by his brothers,
set out for meeting his uncle, filled with sorrow and overwhelmed with
grief for the slaughter of his (hundred) sons. The son of Kunti was
followed by the high-souled and heroic Krishna of Dasharhas race, and by
Yuyudhana, as also by Yuyutsu. The princess Draupadi also, burning with
grief, and accompanied by those Pancala ladies that were with her,
sorrowfully followed her lord. Yudhishthira beheld near the banks of the
Ganga, O king, the crowd of Bharata ladies afflicted with woe and crying
like a flight of she-ospreys. The king was soon surrounded by those
thousands of ladies who, with arms raised aloft in grief, were indulging
in loud lamentations and giving expression to all kinds of words,
agreeable and disagreeable: Where, indeed, is that righteousness of the
king, where is truth and compassion, since he has slain sires and
brothers and preceptors and sons and friends? How, O mighty-armed one,
hath thy heart become tranquil after causing Drona, and thy grandsire
Bhishma, and Jayadratha, to be slaughtered? What need hast thou of
sovereignty, after having seen thy sires and brothers, O Bharata, and the
irresistible Abhimanyu and the sons of Draupadi, thus slaughtered?
Passing over those ladies crying like a flight of she-ospreys, the
mighty-armed king Yudhishthira the just saluted the feet of his eldest
uncle. Having saluted their sire according to custom, those slayers of
foes, the Pandavas, announced themselves to him, each uttering his own
name. Dhritarashtra, exceedingly afflicted with grief on account of the
slaughter of his sons, then reluctantly embraced the eldest son of Pandu,
who was the cause of that slaughter. Having embraced Yudhishthira the
just and spoken a few words of comfort to him, O Bharata, the
wicked-souled Dhritarashtra sought for Bhima, like a blazing fire ready
to burn everything that would approach it. Indeed, that fire of his
wrath, fanned by the wind of his grief, seemed then to be ready to
consume the Bhima-forest. Ascertaining the evil intentions cherished by
him towards Bhima, Krishna, dragging away the real Bhima, presented an
iron statue of the second son of Pandu to the old king. Possessed of
great intelligence, Krishna had, at the very outset, understood the
intentions of Dhritarashtra, and had, therefore, kept such a contrivance
ready for baffling them. Seizing with his two arms that iron Bhima, king
Dhritarashtra, possessed of great strength, broke into pieces, thinking
it to be Bhima himself in flesh and blood. Endued with might equal to
that of 10,000 elephants, the king reduced that statue into fragments.
His own breast, however, became considerably bruised and he began to
vomit blood. Covered with blood, the king fell down on the ground like a
parijata tree topped with its flowery burden. His learned charioteer
Sanjaya, the son of Gavalgana, raised the monarch and soothing and
comforting him, said, Do not act so. The king then, having cast off his
wrath and returned to his normal disposition, became filled with grief
and began to weep aloud, saying, Alas, oh Bhima, alas, oh Bhima!
Understanding that he was no longer under the influence of wrath, and
that he was truly sorry for having (as he believed) killed Bhima,
Vasudeva, that foremost of men, said these words, Do not grieve, O
Dhritarashtra, for thou hast not slain Bhimasena! That is an iron statue,
O king, which has been broken by thee! Understanding that thou wert
filled with rage, O bull of Bharatas race, I dragged the son of Kunti
away from within the jaws of Death. O tiger among kings, there is none
equal to thee in strength of body. What man is there, O mighty-armed one,
that would endure pressure of thy arms? Indeed, as no one can escape with
life from an encounter with the Destroyer himself, even so no body can
come out safe from within thy embrace. It was for this that yonder iron
statue of Bhima, which had been caused to be made by thy son, had been
kept ready for thee. Through grief for the death of thy sons, thy mind
has fallen off from righteousness. It is for this, O great king, that
thou seekest to slay Bhimasena. The slaughter of Bhima, however, O king,
would do thee no good. Thy sons, O monarch, would not be revived by it.
Therefore, do thou approve of what has been by us with a view to secure
peace and do not set thy heart on grief!"
Section 13
Vaishampayana said, "Certain maid-servants then came to the king for
washing him. After he had been duly washed, the slayer of Madhu again
addressed him, saying, Thou hast, O king, read the Vedas and diverse
scriptures. Thou hast heard all old histories, and everything about the
duties of kings. Thou art learned, possessed of great wisdom, and
indifferent to strength and weakness. Why then dost thou cherish such
wrath when all that has overtaken thee is the result of thy own fault? I
spoke to thee before the battle. Both Bhishma and Drona, O Bharata, did
the same, as also Vidura and Sanjaya. Thou didst not, however, then
follow our advice. Indeed, though exhorted by us, thou didst not yet act
according to the counsels we offered, knowing that the Pandavas were
superior to thee and thine, O Kauravya, in strength and courage. That
king who is capable of seeing his own faults and knows the distinctions
of place and time, obtains great prosperity. That person, however, who,
though counselled by well-wishers, does not accept their words, good or
bad, meets with distress and is obliged to grieve in consequence of the
evil policy he pursues. Observe thou a different course of life now, O
Bharata! Thou didst not keep thy soul under restraint, but suffered
thyself to be ruled by Duryodhana. That which has come upon thee is due
to thy own fault. Why then dost thou seek to slay Bhima? Recollecting thy
own faults, govern thy wrath now. That mean wretch who had, from pride,
caused the princess of Pancala to be brought into the assembly has been
slain by Bhimasena in just revenge. Look at thy own evil acts as also at
those of thy wicked-souled son. The sons of Pandu are perfectly innocent.
Yet have they been treated most cruelly by thee and him."
Vaishampayana continued, "After he had thus been told nothing but the
truth by Krishna, O monarch, king Dhritarashtra replied unto Devakis son,
saying, It is even so, O thou of mighty arms! What thou sayest, O
Madhava, is perfectly true. It is parental affection, O thou of righteous
soul, that caused me to fall away from righteousness. By good luck, that
tiger among men, the mighty Bhima of true prowess, protected by thee,
came not within my embrace. Now, however, I am free from wrath and fever.
I desire eagerly, O Madhava, to embrace that hero, the second son of
Pandu. When all the kings have been dead, when my children are no more,
upon the sons of Pandu depend my welfare and happiness. Having said these
words, the old king then embraced those princes of excellent frames,
Bhima and Dhananjaya, and those two foremost of men, the two sons of
Madri, and wept, and comforted and pronounced blessings upon them."
