3
"Dhritarashtra said, O thou of great wisdom, my grief has been dispelled
by thy excellent words! I desire, however, to again hear thee speak. How,
indeed, do those that are wise free themselves from mental grief born of
the advent of evils and the bereavement of objects that are dear?
"Vidura said, He that is wise obtains tranquillity by subduing both grief
and joy through means by which one may escape from grief and joy. All
those things about which we are anxious, O bull among men, are ephemeral.
The world is like a plantain tree, without enduring strength. Since the
wise and the foolish, the rich and the poor, all, divested of their
anxieties, sleep on the crematorium, with bodies reft of flesh and full
of bare bones and shrivelled sinews, whom amongst them will the survivors
look upon as possessed of distinguishing marks by which the attributes of
birth and beauty may be ascertained? (When all are equal in death) why
should human beings, whose understandings are always deceived (by the
things of this world) covet one anothers rank and position? The learned
say that the bodies of men are like houses. In time these are destroyed.
There is one being, however, that is eternal. As a person, casting off
one attire, whether old or new, wears another, even such is the case with
the bodies of all embodied beings. O son of Vicitravirya, creatures
obtain weal or woe as the fruit of their own acts. Through their acts
they obtain heaven, O Bharata, or bliss, or woe. Whether able or unable,
they have to bear their burdens which are the result of their own acts.
As amongst earthen pots some break while still on the potters wheel, some
while partially shaped, some as soon as brought into shape, some after
removal from the wheel, some while in course of being removed, some after
removal, some while wet, some while dry, some while being burnt, some
while being removed from the kiln, some after removal therefrom, and some
while being used, even such is the case with the bodies of embodied
creatures. Some are destroyed while yet in the womb, some after coming
out of the womb, some on the day after, some on the expiration of a
fortnight or of a month, some on the expiration of a year or of two
years, some in youth, some in middle age, and some when old. Creatures
are born or destroyed according to their acts in previous lives. When
such is the course of the world, why do you then indulge in grief? As
men, while swimming in sport on the water, sometimes dive and sometimes
emerge, O king, even so creatures sink and emerge in lifes stream. They
that are of little wisdom suffer or meet with destruction as the result
of their own acts. They, however, that are wise, observant of virtue, and
desirous of doing good unto all living creatures, they, acquainted with
the real nature of the appearance of creatures in this world, attain at
last to the highest end."
