SECTION CCCXXXIII
"Bhishma said, Having ascended the summit of the mountain, O Bharata, the
son of Vyasa sat down upon a level spot free from blades of grass and
retired from the haunts of other creatures. Agreeably to the direction of
the scriptures and to the ordinances laid down, that ascetic, conversant
with the gradual order of the successive processes of Yoga, held his soul
first in one place and then in another, commencing from his feet and
proceeding through all the limbs. Then when the Sun had not risen long,
Suka sat, with his face turned Eastwards, and hands and feet drawn in, in
an humble attitude. In that spot where the intelligent son of Vyasa sat
prepared to address himself to Yoga, there were no flocks of birds, no
sound, and no sight that was repulsive or terror-inspiring. He then
beheld his own Soul freed from all attachments. Beholding that highest of
all things, he laughed in joy.[1787] He once more set himself pre-pared
to Yoga for attaining to the path of Emancipation. Becoming the great
master of Yoga, he transcended the element of space. He then
circumambulated the celestial Rishi Narada, and represented unto that
foremost of Rishis the fact of his having addressed himself to the
highest Yoga.
"Suka said,--I have succeeded in beholding the path (of Emancipation), I
have addrest myself to it. Blessed be thou, O thou of wealth of penances!
I shall, through thy grace, O thou of great splendour, attain to an end
that is highly desirable!"
"Bhishma said,--'Having received the permission of Narada, Suka the son
of the Island-born Vyasa saluted the celestial Rishi and once more set
himself to Yoga and entered the element of space. Ascending then from the
breast of the Kailasa mountain, he soared into the sky. Capable of
traversing through the welkin, the blessed Suka of fixed conclusion, then
identified himself with the element of Wind. As that foremost of
regenerate ones, possessed of effulgence like that of Garuda, was
traversing through the skies with the speed of the wind or thought, all
creatures, cast their eyes upon him. Endued with the splendour of fire or
the Sun, Suka then regarded the three worlds in their entirety as one
homogenous Brahma, and proceeded along that path of great length. Indeed,
all creatures mobile and immobile, cast their eyes upon him as he
proceeded with concentrated attention, and a tranquil and fearless soul.
All creatures, agreeably to the ordinance and according to their power,
worshipped him with reverence. The denizens of heaven rained showers of
celestial flowers upon him. Beholding him, all the tribes of Apsaras and
Gandharvas became filled with wonder. The Rishis also, that were crowned
with success, became equally amazed. And they asked themselves,--who is
this one that has attained to success by his penances?--With gaze
with-drawn from his own body but turned upwards he is filling us all with
pleasure by his glances!--Of highly righteous soul and celebrated
through-out the three worlds, Suka proceeded in silence, his face turned
towards the East and gaze directed towards the sun. As he proceeded, he
seemed to fill the entire welkin with an all-pervading noise. Beholding
him coming in that way, all the tribes of the Apsaras, struck with awe, O
king, became filled with amazement. Headed by Panchachuda and others,
they looked at Suka with eyes expanded by wonder. And they asked one
another, saying;--What deity is this one that has attained to such a high
end? Without doubt, he comes hither, freed from all attachments and
emancipated from all desires!--Suka then proceeded to the Malaya
mountains where Urvasi and Purvachitti used to dwell always. Both of them
beholding the energy of the son of the great regenerate Rishi, became
filled with wonder. And they said,--Wonderful is this concentration of
attention (to Yoga) of a regenerate youth who was accustomed to the
recitation and study of the Vedas! Soon will he traverse the entire
welkin like the Moon. It was by dutiful service and humble ministrations
towards his sire that he acquired this excellent understanding. He is
firmly attached to his sire, possessed of austere penances, and is very
much loved by his sire. Alas, why has he been dismissed by his
inattentive father to proceed (thus) along a way whence there is no
return?--Hearing these words of Urvasi, and attending to their import,
Suka, that foremost of all persons conversant with duties, cast his eyes
on all sides, and once more beheld the entire welkin, the whole Earth
with her mountains and waters and forests, and also all the lakes and
rivers. All the deities also of both sexes, joining their hands, paid
reverence to the son of the Island-born Rishi and gazed at him with
wonder and respect. That foremost of all righteous men, Suka, addressing
all of them, said these words,--If my sire follow me and repeatedly call
after me by my name, do all of you together return him an answer for me.
Moved by the affection all of you bear for me, do you accomplish this
request of mine!--Hearing these words of Suka, all the points of the
compass, all the forest, all the seas, all the rivers, and all the
mountains, answered him from every side, saying,--We accept thy command,
O regenerate one! It shall be as thou sayst! It is in this way that we
answer the words spoken by the Rishi!
