
SECTION CLVIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Those mighty car-warriors, the heroic Pandavas, then
went, O king, from forest to forest killing deer and many animals (for
their food). And in the course of their wanderings they saw the countries
of the Matsyas, the Trigartas, the Panchalas and then of the Kichakas,
and also many beautiful woods and lakes therein. And they all had matted
locks on their heads and were attired in barks of trees and the skins of
animals. Indeed, with Kunti in their company those illustrious heroes
were attired in the garbs of ascetics. And those mighty car-warriors
sometimes proceeded in haste, carrying their mother on their backs; and
sometimes they proceeded in disguise, and sometimes again with great
celerity. And they used to study the Rik and the other Vedas and also all
the Vedangas as well as the sciences of morals and politics. And the
Pandavas, conversant with the science of morals, met, in course of their
wanderings their grandfather (Vyasa). And saluting the illustrious
Krishna-Dwaipayana, those chastisers of enemies, with their mother, stood
before him with joined hands.'
"Vyasa then said, 'Ye bulls of Bharata's race, I knew beforehand of this
affliction of yours consisting in your deceitful exile by the son of
Dhritarashtra. Knowing this, I have come to you, desirous of doing you
some great good. Do not grieve for what hath befallen you. Know that all
this is for your happiness. Undoubtedly, the sons of Dhritarashtra and
you are all equal in my eye. But men are always partial to those who are
in misfortune or of tender years. It is therefore, that my affection for
you is greater now. And in consequence of that affection, I desire to do
you good. Listen to me! Not far off before you is a delightful town where
no danger can overtake you. Live ye there in disguise, waiting for my
return.'
'Vaisampayana continued, 'Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, thus comforting
the Pandavas, led them into the town of Ekachakra. And the master also
comforted Kunti, saying, 'Live, O daughter! This son of thine,
Yudhishthira, ever devoted to truth, this illustrious bull among men,
having by his justice conquered the whole world, will rule over all the
other monarchs of the earth. There is little doubt that, having by means
of Bhima's and Arjuna's prowess conquered the whole earth with her belt
of seas, he will enjoy the sovereignty thereof. Thy sons as well as those
of Madri--mighty car-warriors all--will cheerfully sport as pleaseth them
in their dominions. These tigers among men will also perform various
sacrifices, such as the Rajasuya and the horse-sacrifice, in which the
presents unto the Brahmanas are very large. And these thy sons will rule
their ancestral kingdom, maintaining their friends and relatives in
luxury and affluence and happiness.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'With these words Vyasa introduced them into the
dwelling of a Brahmana. And the island-born Rishi, addressing the eldest
of the Pandavas, said, 'Wait here for me! I will come back to you! By
adapting yourselves to the country and the occasion you will succeed in
becoming very happy.'
"Then, O king, the Pandavas with joined hands said unto the Rishi, 'So be
it.' And the illustrious master, the Rishi Vyasa, then went away to the
region whence he had come.'"
return.'
