
SECTION CLII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then, when the night had passed away, a large
concourse of the townspeople came there in haste to see the sons of
Pandu. After extinguishing the fire, they saw that the house just burnt
down had been built of lac in materials and that (Duryodhana's)
counsellor Purochana had been burnt to death. And the people began to
bewail aloud saying, 'Indeed, this had been contrived by the sinful
Duryodhana for the destruction of the Pandavas. There is little doubt
that Duryodhana hath, with Dhritarashtra's knowledge, burnt to death the
heirs of Pandu, else the prince would have been prevented by his father.
There is little doubt that even Bhishma, the son of Santanu, and Drona
and Vidura and Kripa and other Kauravas have not, any of them, followed
the dictates of duty. Let us now send to Dhritarashtra to say, 'Thy great
desire hath been achieved! Thou hast burnt to death the Pandavas!'
"They then began to extinguish the members to obtain some trace of the
Pandavas, and they saw the innocent Nishada woman with her five sons
burnt to death. Then the miner sent by Vidura, while removing the ashes,
covered the hole he had dug with those ashes in such a way that it
remained unnoticed by all who had gone there.
"The citizens then sent to Dhritarashtra to inform him that the Pandavas
along with (Duryodhana's) counsellor Purochana had been burnt to death.
King Dhritarashtra, on hearing the evil news of the death of the
Pandavas, wept in great sorrow. And he said, 'King Pandu, my brother of
great fame, hath, indeed, died today when those heroic sons of his
together with their mother have been burnt to death. Ye men, repair
quickly to Varanavata and cause the funeral rites to be performed of
those heroes and of the daughter of Kuntiraj! Let also the bones of the
deceased be sanctified with the usual rites, and let all the beneficial
and great acts (usual on such occasions) be performed. Let the friends
and relatives of those that have been burnt to death repair thither. Let
also all other beneficial acts that ought, under the circumstances, to be
performed by us for the Pandavas and Kunti be accomplished by wealth.'
"Having said this, Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, surrounded by his
relatives, offered oblations of water to the sons of Pandu. And all of
them, afflicted with excessive sorrow, bewailed aloud, exclaiming, 'O
Yudhishthira! Oh prince of the Kuru race!'--While others cried aloud,
'Oh, Bhima!--O Phalguna!'--while some again,--'Oh, the twins!--Oh,
Kunti!'--Thus did they sorrow for the Pandavas and offer oblations of
water unto them. The citizens also wept for the Pandavas but Vidura did
not weep much, because he knew the truth.
"Meanwhile the Pandavas endued with great strength with their mother
forming a company of six going out of the town of Varanavata arrived at
the banks of the Ganga. They then speedily reached the opposite bank
aided by the strength of the boatmen's arms, the rapidity of the river's
current, and a favourable wind. Leaving the boat, they proceeded in the
southern direction finding their way in the dark by the light of the
stars. After much suffering they at last reached, O king, a dense forest.
They were then tired and thirsty; sleep was closing their eyes every
moment. Then Yudhishthira, addressing Bhima endued with great energy,
said, 'What can be more painful than this? We are now in the deep woods.
We know not which side is which, nor can we proceed much further. We do
not know whether that wretch Purochana hath or hath not been burnt to
death. How shall we escape from these dangers unseen by others? O
Bharata, taking us on thyself, proceed thou as before. Thou alone amongst
us art strong and swift as the wind.'
"Thus addressed by Yudhishthira the just, the mighty Bhimasena, taking up
on his body Kunti and his brothers, began to proceed with great
celerity.'"
