5
"Dhritarashtra said, Tell me in detail everything about the ways of that
intelligence by which this wilderness of duties may be safely covered.
"Vidura said, Having bowed down to the Self-create, I will obey thy
behest by telling thee how the great sages speak of the wilderness of
life. A certain brahmana, living in the great world, found himself on one
occasion in a large inaccessible forest teeming with beasts of prey. It
abounded on every side with lions and other animals looking like
elephants, all of which were engaged in roaring aloud. Such was the
aspect of that forest that Yama himself would take fright at it.
Beholding the forest, the heart of the brahmana became exceedingly
agitated. His hair stood on end, and other signs of fear manifested
themselves, O scorcher of foes! Entering it, he began to run hither and
thither, casting his eyes on every point of the compass for finding out
somebody whose shelter he might seek. Wishing to avoid those terrible
creatures, he ran in fright. He could not succeed, however, in distancing
them or freeing himself from their presence. He then saw that that
terrible forest was surrounded with a net, and that a frightful woman
stood there, stretching her arms. That large forest was also encompassed
by many five-headed snakes of dreadful forms, tall as cliffs and touching
the very heavens. Within it was a pit whose mouth was covered with many
hard and unyielding creepers and herbs. The brahmana, in course of his
wanderings, fell into that invisible pit. He became entangled in those
clusters of creepers that were interwoven with one another, like the
large fruit of a jack tree hanging by its stalk. He continued to hang
there, feet upwards and head downwards. While he was in that posture,
diverse other calamities overtook him. He beheld a large and mighty snake
within the pit. He also saw a gigantic elephant near its mouth. That
elephant, dark in complexion, had six faces and twelve feet. And the
animal gradually approached that pit covered with creepers and trees.
About the twigs of the tree (that stood at the mouth of the pit), roved
many bees of frightful forms, employed from before in drinking the honey
gathered in their comb about which they swarmed in large numbers.
Repeatedly they desired, O bull of Bharatas race, to taste that honey
which though sweet to all creatures could, however, attract children
only. The honey (collected in the comb) fell in many jets below. The
person who was hanging in the pit continually drank those jets. Employed,
in such a distressful situation, in drinking that honey, his thirst,
however, could not be appeased. Unsatiated with repeated draughts, the
person desired for more. Even then, O king, he did not become indifferent
to life. Even there, the man continued to hope for existence. A number of
black and white rats were eating away the roots of that tree. There was
fear from the beasts of prey, from that fierce woman on the outskirts of
that forest, from that snake at the bottom of the well, from that
elephant near its top, from the fall of the tree through the action of
the rats, and lastly from those bees flying about for tasting the honey.
In that plight he continued to dwell, deprived of his senses, in that
wilderness, never losing at any time the hope of prolonging his life."
