
SECTION CLVI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Roused from sleep, those tigers among men, with
their mother, beholding the extraordinary beauty of Hidimva, were filled
with wonder. And Kunti, gazing at her with wonder at her beauty,
addressed her sweetly and gave her every assurance. She asked, 'O thou of
the splendour of a daughter of the celestials, whose art thou and who art
thou? O thou of the fairest complexion, on what business hast thou come
hither and whence hast thou come? If thou art the deity of these woods or
an Apsara, tell me all regarding thyself and also why thou stayest here?'
Thereupon Hidimva replied, 'This extensive forest that thou seest, of the
hue of blue cloud, is the abode of a Rakshasa of the name of Hidimva. O
handsome lady, know me as the sister of that chief of the Rakshasa.
Revered dame, I had been sent by that brother of mine to kill thee with
all thy children. But on arriving here at the command of that cruel
brother of mine, I beheld thy mighty son. Then, O blessed lady, I was
brought under the control of thy son by the deity of love who pervadeth
the nature of every being, and I then (mentally) chose that mighty son of
thine as my husband. I tried my best to convey you hence, but I could not
(because of thy son's opposition). Then the cannibal, seeing my delay,
came hither to kill all these thy children. But he hath been dragged
hence with force by that mighty and intelligent son of thine--my husband.
Behold now that couple--man and Rakshasa--both endued with great strength
and prowess, engaged in combat, grinding each other and filling the whole
region with their shouts.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing those words of hers, Yudhishthira
suddenly rose up and Arjuna also and Nakula and Sahadeva of great energy
and they beheld Bhima and the Rakshasa already engaged in fight, eager to
overcome each other and dragging each other with great force, like two
lions endued with great might. The dust raised by their feet in
consequence of that encounter looked like the smoke of a
forest-conflagration. Covered with that dust their huge bodies resembled
two tall cliffs enveloped in mist. Then Arjuna, beholding Bhima rather
oppressed in the fight by the Rakshasa, slowly, said with smiles on his
lips, 'Fear not, O Bhima of mighty arms! We (had been asleep and
therefore) knew not that thou wast engaged with a terrible Rakshasa and
tired in fight. Here do I stand to help thee, let me slay the Rakshasa,
and let Nakula and Sahadeva protect our mother.' Hearing him, Bhima said,
'Look on this encounter, O brother, like a stranger. Fear not for the
result. Having come within the reach of my arms, he shall not escape with
life.' Then Arjuna said, 'What need, O Bhima, for keeping the Rakshasa
alive so long? O oppressor of enemies, we are to go hence, and cannot
stay here longer. The east is reddening, the morning twilight is about to
set in. The Rakshasa became stronger by break of day, therefore, hasten,
O Bhima! Play not (with thy victim), but slay the terrible Rakshasa soon.
During the two twilights Rakshasas always put forth their powers of
deception. Use all the strength of thy arms.
"Vaisampayana continued, 'At this speech of Arjuna, Bhima blazing up with
anger, summoned the might that Vayu (his father) puts forth at the time
of the universal dissolution. And filled with rage, he quickly raised
high in the air the Rakshasa's body, blue as the clouds of heaven, and
whirled it a hundred times. Then addressing the cannibal, Bhima said, 'O
Rakshasa, thy intelligence was given thee in vain, and in vain hast thou
grown and thriven on unsanctified flesh. Thou deservest, therefore, an
unholy death and I shall reduce thee today to nothing. I shall make this
forest blessed today, like one without prickly plants. And, O Rakshasa,
thou shalt no longer slay human beings for thy food.' Arjuna at this
juncture, said, 'O Bhima, if thou thinkest it a hard task for thee to
overcome this Rakshasa in combat, let me render thee help, else, slay him
thyself without loss of time. Or, O Vrikodara, let me alone slay the
Rakshasa. Thou art tired, and hast almost finished the affair. Well dost
thou deserve rest.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Arjuna, Bhima was fired
with rage and dashing the Rakshasa on the ground with all his might slew
him as if he were an animal. The Rakshasa, while dying, sent forth a
terrible yell that filled the whole forest, and was deep as the sound of
a wet drum. Then the mighty Bhima, holding the body with his hands, bent
it double, and breaking it in the middle, greatly gratified his brothers.
Beholding Hidimva slain, they became exceedingly glad and lost no time in
offering their congratulations to Bhima, that chastiser of all foes. Then
Arjuna worshipping the illustrious Bhima of terrible prowess, addressed
him again and said, 'Revered senior, I think there is a town not far off
from this forest. Blest be thou, let us go hence soon, so that Duryodhana
may not trace us.'
"Then all those mighty car-warriors, those tigers among men, saying, 'So
be it,' proceeded along with their mother, followed by Hidimva, the
Rakshasa woman.'"
