
SECTION CLIII
"Vaisampayana said," As the mighty Bhima proceeded, the whole forest with
its trees and their branches seemed to tremble, in consequence of their
clash with his breast. The motion of his thighs raised a wind like unto
that which blows during the months of Jyaishtha and Ashadha (May and
June). And the mighty Bhima proceeded, making a path for himself, but
treading down the trees and creepers before him. In fact, he broke (by
the pressure of his body) the large trees and plants, with their flowers
and fruits, standing on his way. Even so passeth through the woods
breaking down mighty trees, the leader of a herd of elephants, of the age
of sixty years, angry and endued with excess of energy, during the season
of rut when the liquid juice trickle down the three parts of his body.
Indeed, so great was the force with which Bhima endued with the speed of
Garuda or of Marut (the god of wind), proceeded that the Pandavas seemed
to faint in consequence. Frequently swimming across streams difficult of
being crossed, the Pandavas disguised themselves on their way from fear
of the sons of Dhritarashtra. And Bhima carried on his shoulder his
illustrious mother of delicate sensibilities along the uneven banks of
rivers. Towards the evening, O bull of Bharata's race, Bhima (bearing his
brothers and mother on his back) reached a terrible forest where fruits
and roots and water were scarce and which resounded with the terrible
cries of birds and beasts. The twilight deepened the cries of birds and
beasts became fiercer, darkness shrouded everything from the view and
untimely winds began to blow that broke and laid low many a tree large
and small and many creepers with dry leaves and fruits. The Kaurava
princes, afflicted with fatigue and thirst, and heavy with sleep, were
unable to proceed further. They then all sat down in that forest without
food and drink. Then Kunti, smitten with thirst, said unto her sons, 'I
am the mother of the five Pandavas and am now in their midst. Yet I am
burning with thirst!' Kunti repeatedly said this unto her sons. Hearing
these words, Bhima's heart, from affection for his mother, was warmed by
compassion and he resolved to go (along as before). Then Bhima,
proceeding through that terrible and extensive forest without a living
soul, saw a beautiful banian tree with widespreading branches. Setting
down there his brothers and mother, O bull of Bharata's race; he said
unto them, 'Rest you here, while I go in quest of water. I hear the sweet
cries of aquatic fowls. I think there must be a large pool here.'
Commanded, O Bharata, by his elder brother who said unto him, 'Go', Bhima
proceeded in the direction whence the cries of those aquatic fowls were
coming. And, O bull of Bharata's race, he soon came upon a lake and
bathed and slaked his thirst. And affectionate unto his brothers, he
brought for them, O Bharata, water by soaking his upper garments. Hastily
retracing his way over those four miles he came unto where his mother was
and beholding her he was afflicted with sorrow and began to sigh like a
snake. Distressed with grief at seeing his mother and brothers asleep on
the bare ground, Vrikodara began to weep, 'Oh, wretch that I am, who
behold my brothers asleep on the bare ground, what can befall me more
painful than this? Alas, they who formerly at Varanavata could not sleep
on the softest and costliest beds are now asleep on the bare ground! Oh,
what more painful sight shall I ever behold than that of Kunti--the
sister of Vasudeva, that grinder of hostile hosts--the daughter of
Kuntiraja,--herself decked with every auspicious mark, the
daughter-in-law of Vichitravirya,--the wife of the illustrious
Pandu,--the mother of us (five brothers),--resplendent as the filaments
of the lotus and delicate and tender and fit to sleep on the costliest
bed--thus asleep, as she should never be, on the bare ground! Oh, she who
hath brought forth these sons by Dharma and Indra and Maruta--she who
hath ever slept within palaces--now sleepeth, fatigued, on the bare
ground! What more painful sight shall ever be beheld by me than that of
these tigers among men (my brothers) asleep on the ground! Oh, the
virtuous Yudhishthira, who deserveth the sovereignty of the three worlds,
sleepeth, fatigued, like an ordinary man, on the bare ground! This Arjuna
of the darkish hue of blue clouds, and unequalled amongst men sleepeth on
the ground like an ordinary person! Oh, what can be more painful than
this? Oh the twins, who in beauty are like the twin Aswins amongst the
celestials, are asleep like ordinary mortals on the bare ground! He who
hath no jealous evil-minded relatives, liveth in happiness in this world
like a single tree in a village. The tree that standeth single in a
village with its leaves and fruits, from absence of other of the same
species, becometh sacred and is worshipped and venerated by all. They
again that have many relatives who, however, are all heroic and virtuous,
live happily in the world without sorrow of any kind. Themselves powerful
and growing in prosperity and always gladdening their friends and
relatives, they live, depending on each other, like tall trees growing in
the same forest. We, however, have been forced in exile by the wicked
Dhritarashtra and his sons having escaped with difficulty, from sheer
good fortune, a fiery death. Having escaped from that fire, we are now
resting in the shade of this tree. Having already suffered so much, where
now are we to go? Ye sons of Dhritarashtra of little foresight, ye wicked
fellows, enjoy your temporary success. The gods are certainly auspicious
to you. But ye wicked wretches, ye are alive yet, only because
Yudhishthira doth not command me to take your lives. Else this very day,
filled with wrath, I would send thee, (O Duryodhana), to the regions of
Yama (Pluto) with thy children and friends and brothers, and Karna, and
(Sakuni) the son of Suvala! But what can I do, for, ye sinful wretches,
the virtuous king Yudhishthira, the eldest of the Pandavas, is not yet
angry with you?'
"Having said this, Bhima of mighty arms, fired with wrath, began to
squeeze his palms, sighing deeply in affliction. Excited again with wrath
like an extinguished fire blazing up all on a sudden, Vrikodara once more
beheld his brothers sleeping on the ground like ordinary persons sleeping
in trustfulness. And Bhima said unto himself, 'I think there is some town
not far off from this forest. These all are asleep, so I will sit awake.
And this will slake their thirst after they rise refreshed from sleep.'
Saying this, Bhima sat there awake, keeping watch over his sleeping
mother and brothers.'"
