
SECTION CLVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Bhima, beholding Hidimva following them, addressed
her, saying, 'Rakshasas revenge themselves on their enemies by adopting
deceptions that are incapable of being penetrated. Therefore, O Hidimva,
go thou the way on which thy brother hath gone.' Then Yudhishthira
beholding Bhima in rage, said, 'O Bhima, O tiger among men, however
enraged, do not slay a woman. O Pandava, the observance of virtue is a
higher duty than the protection of life. Hidimva, who had come with the
object of slaying us, thou hast already slain. This woman is the sister
of that Rakshasa, what can she do to us even if she were angry?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Hidimva reverentially saluting Kunti and
her son Yudhishthira also, said, with joined palms, 'O revered lady, thou
knowest the pangs that women are made to feel at the hands of the deity
of love. Blessed dame, these pangs, of which Bhimasena hath been the
cause, are torturing me. I had hitherto borne these insufferable pangs,
waiting for the time (when thy son could assuage them). That time is now
come, when I expected I would be made happy. Casting off my friends and
relations and the usage of my race, I have, O blessed lady, chosen this
son of thine, this tiger among men, as my husband. I tell thee truly, O
illustrious lady, that if I am cast off by that hero or by thee either, I
will no longer bear this life of mine. Therefore, O thou of the fairest
complexion, it behoveth thee to show me mercy, thinking me either as very
silly or thy obedient slave. O illustrious dame, unite me with this thy
son, my husband. Endued as he is with the form of a celestial, let me go
taking him with me wherever I like. Trust me, O blessed lady, I will
again bring him back unto you all. When you think of me I will come to
you immediately and convey you whithersoever ye may command. I will
rescue you from all dangers and carry you across inaccessible and uneven
regions. I will carry you on my back whenever ye desire to proceed with
swiftness. O, be gracious unto me and make Bhima accept me. It hath been
said that in a season of distress one should protect one's life by any
means. He, that seeketh to discharge that duty should not scruple about
the means. He, that in a season of distress keepeth his virtue, is the
foremost of virtuous men. Indeed, distress is the greatest danger to
virtue and virtuous men. It is virtue that protecteth life; therefore is
virtue called the giver of life. Hence the means by which virtue or the
observance of a duty is secured can never be censurable.'
"Hearing these words of Hidimva, Yudhishthira said. 'It is even so, O
Hidimva, as thou sayest. There is no doubt of it. But, O thou of slender
waist, thou must act even as thou hast said. Bhima will, after he hath
washed himself and said his prayers and performed the usual propitiatory
rites, pay his attentions to thee till the sun sets. Sport thou with him
as thou likest during the day, O thou that art endued with the speed of
the mind! But thou must bring back Bhimasena hither every day at
nightfall.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Bhima, expressing his assent to all that
Yudhishthira said, addressed Hidimva, saying, 'Listen to me, O Rakshasa
woman! Truly do I make this engagement with thee that I will stay with
thee, O thou of slender waist, until thou obtainest a son.' Then Hidimva,
saying, 'So be it,' took Bhima upon her body and sped through the sides.
On mountain peaks of picturesque scenery and regions sacred to the gods,
abounding with dappled herds and echoing with the melodies of feathered
tribes, herself assuming the handsomest form decked with every ornament
and pouring forth at times mellifluous strains. Hidimva sported with the
Pandava and studied to make him happy. So also, in inaccessible regions
of forests, and on mountain-breasts overgrown with blossoming trees on
lakes resplendent with lotuses and lilies, islands of rivers and their
pebbly banks, on sylvan streams with beautiful banks and
mountain-currents, in picturesque woods with blossoming trees and
creepers in Himalayan bowers, and various caves, on crystal pools smiling
with lotuses, on sea-shores shining with gold and pearls, in beautiful
towns and fine gardens, in woods sacred to the gods and on hill-sides, in
the regions of Guhyakas and ascetics, on the banks of Manasarovara
abounding with fruits and flowers of every season Hidimva, assuming the
handsomest form, sported with Bhima and studied to make him happy. Endued
with the speed of the mind, she sported with Bhima in all these regions,
till in time, she conceived and brought forth a mighty son begotten upon
her by the Pandava. Of terrible eyes and large mouth and straight arrowy
ears, the child was terrible to behold. Of lips brown as copper and sharp
teeth and loud roar, of mighty arms and great strength and excessive
prowess, this child became a mighty bowman. Of long nose, broad chest,
frightfully swelling calves, celerity of motion and excessive strength,
he had nothing human in his countenance, though born of man. And he
excelled (in strength and prowess) all Pisachas and kindred tribes as
well as all Rakshasas. And, O monarch, though a little child, he grew up
a youth the very hour he was born. The mighty hero soon acquired high
proficiency in the use of all weapons. The Rakshasa women bring forth the
very day they conceive, and capable of assuming any forms at will, they
always change their forms. And the bald-headed child, that mighty bowman,
soon after his birth, bowing down to his mother, touched her feet and the
feet also of his father. His parents then bestowed upon him a name. His
mother having remarked that his head was (bald) like unto a Ghata
(water-pot), both his parents thereupon called him Ghatotkacha (the
pot-headed). And Ghatotkacha who was exceedingly devoted to the Pandavas,
became a great favourite with them, indeed almost one of them.
"Then Hidimva, knowing that the period of her stay (with her husband) had
come to an end, saluted the Pandavas and making a new appointment with
them went away whithersoever she liked. And Ghatotkacha also--that
foremost of Rakshasas--promising unto his father that he would come when
wanted on business, saluted them and went away northward. Indeed, it was
the illustrious Indra who created (by lending a portion of himself) the
mighty car-warrior Ghatotkacha as a fit antagonist of Karna of unrivalled
energy, in consequence of the dart he had given unto Karna (and which was
sure to kill the person against whom it would be hurled).'"
