SECTION CCCLVII
"Bhishma said, 'Proceeding by many delightful forests and lakes and
sacred waters, the Brahmana at last arrived at the retreat of a certain
ascetic. Arrived there, he enquired of him, in proper words, about the
Naga of whom he had heard from his guest, and instructed by him he
pursued his journey. With a clear idea of the purpose of his journey, the
Brahmana then reached the house of the Naga. Entering it duly, he
proclaimed himself in proper words, saying,--Ho! who is there!' I am a
Brahmana, come hither as a guest!--Hearing these words, the chaste wife
of the Naga, possessed of great beauty and devoted to the observance of
all duties, showed herself. Always attentive to the duties of
hospitality, she worshipped the guest with due rites, and welcoming him,
said, 'What can I do for you?'
"The Brahmana said, 'O lady, I am sufficiently honoured by thee with the
sweet words thou hast said unto me. The fatigue of my journey has also
been dispelled. I desire, O blessed lady, to see thy excellent lord. This
is my high object. This is the one object of my desire. It is for this
reason that I have come today to the residence of the Naga, thy husband.'
"The wife of the Naga said, 'Reverend sir, my husband has gone to drag
the car of Surya for a month. O learned Brahmana, he will be back in
fifteen days, and will, without doubt show himself unto thee. I have thus
told thee the reason of my husband's absence from home. Be that as it
may, what else is there that I can do for thee? Tell me this!'
"The Brahmana said, 'O chaste lady, I have come hither with the object of
seeing thy husband. O reverend dame, I shall dwell in the adjacent
forest, waiting for his return. When thy husband comes back, do kindly
tell him that I have arrived at this place impelled by the desire of
seeing him. Thou shouldst also inform me of his return when that event
occurs. O blessed lady, I shall, till then, reside on the banks of the
Gomati, waiting for his return and living all the while upon frugal fare.
Having said this repeatedly unto the wife of the Naga, that foremost of
Brahmanas proceeded to the banks of the Gomati for residing there till
the time of the Naga's return.'"
