SECTION CCCXX
"Yudhishthira said, 'Having acquired great power and great wealth, and
having obtained a long period of life, how may one succeed in avoiding
death? By which of these means, viz., penances, or the accomplishment of
the diverse acts (laid down in the Vedas), or by knowledge of the Srutis,
or the application of medicines, can one succeed in avoiding decrepitude
and death?'
"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of
Panchasikha who was a Bhikshu in his practices and Janaka. Once on a time
Janaka, the ruler of the Videhas, questioned the great Rishi Panchasikha,
who was the foremost of all persons conversant with the Vedas and who had
all his doubts removed in respect of the purpose and import of all
duties. The King said,--By what conduct, O holy one may one transcend
decrepitude and death? It is by penances, or by the understanding, or by
religious acts (like sacrifices, and vows), or by study and knowledge of
the scriptures?--Thus addressed by the ruler of the Vedas the learned
Panchasikha, conversant with all invisible things, answered,
saying,--There is no prevention of these two (viz., decrepitude and
death); nor is it true that cannot be prevented under any circumstances.
Neither days, nor nights, nor months, cease to go on. Only that man, who,
though transitory, betakes himself to the eternal path (of the religion
of Nivritti or abstention from all acts) succeeds in avoiding birth and
death. Destruction overtakes, all creatures. All creatures seem to be
ceaselessly borne along the infinite current of time. Those that are
borne along the infinite current of time which is without a raft (to
rescue) and which is infested by those two mighty alligators, viz.,
decrepitude and death, sink down without anybody coming to their
assistance. As one is swept along that current, one fails to find any
friend for help and one fails to be inspired with interest for any one
else. One meets with spouses and other friends only on one's road. One
had never before enjoyed this kind of companionship with any one for any
length of time. Creatures, as they are borne along the current of time,
become repeatedly attracted towards one another like masses of clouds
moved by the wind meeting one another with loud sound. Decrepitude and
death are devourers of all creatures, like wolves. Indeed, they devour
the strong and the weak, the short and the tall. Among creatures,
therefore, which are all so transitory, only the Soul exists eternally.
Why should he, then, rejoice when creatures are born and why should he
grieve when they die? Whence have I come. Who am I? Whither shall I go?
Whose am I? Before what do I rest? What shall I be? For what reason then
dost thou grieve for what? Who else then thou wilt behold heaven or hell
(for what thou doest)? Hence, without throwing aside the scriptures, one
should make gifts and perform sacrifices!--"
