2
Kripa said, "We have heard all that thou hast said, O puissant one!
Listen, however, to a few words of mine, O mighty armed one! All men are
subjected to and governed by these two forces, Destiny and Exertion.
There is nothing higher than these two. Our acts do not become successful
in consequence of destiny alone, nor of exertion alone, O best of men!
Success springs from the union of the two. All purposes, high and low,
are dependent on a union of those two. In the whole world, it is through
these two that men are seen to act as also to abstain. What result is
produced by the clouds pouring upon a mountain? What results are not
produced by them pouring upon a cultivated field? Exertion, where destiny
is not auspicious, and absence of exertion where destiny is auspicious,
both these are fruitless! What I have said before (about the union of the
two) is the truth. If the rains properly moisten a well-tilled soil, the
seed produces great results. Human success is of this nature.
Sometimes, Destiny, having settled a course of events, acts of itself
(without waiting for exertion). For all that, the wise, aided by skill
have recourse to exertion. All the purposes of human acts, O bull among
men, are accomplished by the aid of those two together. Influenced by
these two, men are seen to strive or abstain. Recourse may be had to
exertion. But exertion succeeds through destiny. It is in consequence
also of destiny that one who sets himself to work, depending on exertion,
attains to success. The exertion, however, of even a competent man, even
when well directed, is without the concurrence of destiny, seen in the
world to be unproductive of fruit. Those, therefore, among men, that are
idle and without intelligence, disapprove of exertion. This however, is
not the opinion of the wise.
Generally, an act performed is not seen to be unproductive of fruit in
the world. The absent of action, again, is seen to be productive of grave
misery. A person obtaining something of itself without having made any
efforts, as also one not obtaining anything even after exertion, is not
to be seen. One who is busy in action is capable of supporting life. He,
on the other hand, that is idle, never obtains happiness. In this world
of men it is generally seen that they that are addicted to action are
always inspired by the desire of earning good. If one devoted to action
succeeds in gaining his object or fails to obtain the fruit of his acts,
he does not become censurable in any respect. If anyone in the world is
seen to luxuriously enjoy the fruits of action without doing any action,
he is generally seen to incur ridicule and become an object of hatred. He
who, disregarding this rule about action, liveth otherwise, is said to do
an injury to himself. This is the opinion of those that are endued with
intelligence.
Efforts become unproductive of fruits in consequence of these two
reasons: destiny without exertion and exertion without destiny. Without
exertion, no act in this world becomes successful. Devoted to action and
endued with skill, that person, however, who, having bowed down to the
gods, seeks, the accomplishment of his objects, is never lost. The same
is the case with one who, desirous of success, properly waits upon the
aged, asks of them what is for his good, and obeys their beneficial
counsels. Men approved by the old should always be solicited for counsel
while one has recourse to exertion. These men are the infallible root of
means, and success is dependent on means. He who applies his efforts
after listening to the words of the old, soon reaps abundant fruits from
those efforts. That man who, without reverence and respect for others
(capable of giving him good counsel), seeks the accomplishment of his
purposes, moved by passion, anger, fear, and avarice, soon loses his
prosperity.
This Duryodhana, stained by covetousness and bereft of foresight, had
without taking counsel, foolishly commenced to seek the accomplishment of
an undigested project. Disregarding all his well-wishers and taking
counsel with only the wicked, he had, though dissuaded, waged hostilities
with the Pandavas who are his superiors in all good qualities. He had,
from the beginning, been very wicked. He could not restrain himself. He
did not do the bidding of friends. For all that, he is now burning in
grief and amid calamity. As regards ourselves since we have followed that
sinful wretch, this great calamity hath, therefore, overtaken us! This
great calamity has scorched my understanding. Plunged in reflection, I
fail to see what is for our good!
A man that is stupefied himself should ask counsel of his friends. In
such friends he hath his understanding, his humility, and his prosperity.
One's actions should have their root in them. That should be done which
intelligent friends, having settled by their understanding, should
counsel. Let us, therefore, repair to Dhritarashtra and Gandhari and the
high-souled Vidura and ask them as what we should do. Asked by us, they
will say what, after all this, is for our good. We should do what they
say. Even this is my certain resolution. Those men whose acts do not
succeed even after the application of exertion, should, without doubt, be
regarded as afflicted by destiny."
