3
Vaishampayana said: "At that time the Vrishni ladies dreamed every night
that a woman of black complexion and white teeth, entering their abodes,
laughed aloud and ran through Dvaraka, snatching from them the auspicious
threads in their wrists. The men dreamt that terrible vultures, entering
their houses and fire-chambers, gorged themselves on their bodies. Their
ornaments and umbrellas and standards and armour were seen to be taken
away by terrible Rakshasas. In the very sight of the Vrishnis, the discus
of Krishna, given by Agni, made of iron and having its nave composed of
hardest adamant, ascended into the firmament. In the very sight of
Daruka, the excellent car of Vasudeva, of solar effulgence, and properly
equipped, was taken away by the horses yoked unto it. Those foremost of
steeds, numbering four, (Saivya, Sugriva, Meghapushpa and Valahaka), and
endued with the speed of thought, fled away, dragging the car after them
along the surface of the ocean. The two great standards of Krishnas car
and Valadevas car, that with the device of Garuda and that bearing the
device of the palmyra, which were reverently worshipped by those two
heroes, were taken away by Apsaras who, day and night, called upon the
Vrishnis and the Andhakas to set out on a pilgrimage to some sacred
water. When these omens were seen and heard, those foremost of men, the
mighty car-warriors of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, became desirous of
setting out, with their whole families, on a pilgrimage to some sacred
water. They prepared diverse kinds of viands and edibles and diverse
kinds of wines and meat. The troops of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas,
blazing with beauty and endued with fierce energy, then set out from the
city on cars and steeds and elephants. The Yadavas, then, with their
wives, proceeded to Prabhasa and took up their residence there, each in
the (temporary) habitation that was assigned to him, and all having an
abundance of provisions consisting of edibles and drink.
"Hearing that they had taken up their abode on the sea-coast, Uddhava,
the wisest of men, who was, besides, well-versed in Yoga, proceeded there
and took his leave (for departing). Krishna, with joined hands, saluted
Uddhava, and seeing him bent on departing (from the world) and knowing
that the destructions of the Vrishnis was at hand, did not feel any
disposition to prevent him. The mighty car-warriors among the Vrishnis
and the Andhakas, whose hour had come, then saw Uddhava proceed on his
great journey, filling the whole welkin with his splendour. The Vrishnis,
mixing with wine the food that had been cooked for high-souled Brahmanas,
gave it away unto monkeys and apes. Those heroes of fierce energy then
began their high revels, of which drinking formed the chief feature, at
Prabhasa. The entire field echoed with the blare of hundreds of trumpets
and abounded with actors and dancers plying their vocations. In the very
sight of Krishna, Rama began to drink, with Kritavarma, Yuyudhana and
Gada; and Vabhru also did the same. Then Yuyudhana, inebriated with wine,
derisively laughing at and insulting Kritavarma in the midst of that
assembly, said, What Kshatriya is there who, armed with weapons, will
slay men locked in the embraces of sleep and, therefore, already dead?
Hence, O son of Hridika, the Yadavas will never tolerate what thou hast
done. When Yuyudhana had said these words, Pradyumna, that foremost of
car-warriors, applauded them, expressing his disregard for the son of
Hridika.
"Highly incensed at this, Kritavarma, emphasising his disregard for
Satyaki, by pointing to him with his left hand, said these words:
Professing thyself to be a hero, how couldst thou so cruelly slay the
armless Bhurishrava who, on the field of battle, ( gave up all hostile
intentions and) sat in praya?
"Hearing these words of his, Keshava, that slayer of hostile heroes,
giving way to wrath, cast an angry glance at Kritavarma. Then Satyaki
informed the slayer of Madhu as to how Kritavarma had behaved towards
Satrajit for taking away from him the celebrated gem Syamantaka. Hearing
the narrative, Satyabhama, giving way to wrath and tears, approached
Keshava and sitting on his lap enhanced his anger (for Kritavarma). Then
rising up in a rage, Satyaki said, I swear to thee by Truth that I shall
soon cause this one to follow in the wake of the five sons of Draupadi,
and of Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandithey that were slain by this sinful
wretch, while they were asleep, with the assistance of Dronas son. O thou
of slender waist, Kritavarmas period of life and fame have come to their
end.
"Having said these words, Satyaki rushed at Kritavarma and severed his
head with a sword in the very sight of Keshava. Yuyudhana, having
achieved this feat, began to strike down others there present. Hrishikesa
ran to prevent him from doing further mischief. At that time, however, O
monarch, the Bhojas and Andhakas, impelled by the perverseness of the
hour that had come upon them, all became as one man and surrounded the
son of Sini. Janardana of mighty energy, knowing the character of the
hour, stood unmoved without giving way to anger at the sight of those
heroes rushing in wrath at Satyaki from every side. Urged by fate and
inebriated with drink, they began to strike Yuyudhana with the pots from
which they had been eating. When the son of Sini was being thus
assaulted, Rukminis son became highly enraged. He rushed forward for
rescuing Satyaki who was engaged with the Bhojas and the Andhakas. Endued
with might of arms and wealth of energy, those two heroes exerted
themselves with great courage. But as the odds were overwhelming, both of
them were slain in the very sight of Krishna. The delighter of the Yadus,
beholding his own son, and the son of Sini too, slain, took up, in wrath,
a handful of the Eraka grass that grew there. That handful of grass
became a terrible bolt of iron endued with the energy of the thunderbolt.
With it Krishna slew all those that came before him. Then the Andhakas
and the Bhojas, the Saineyas and the Vrishnis, urged by Time, struck one
another in that fearful melee. Indeed, O king, whoever amongst them took
up in wrath a few blades of the Eraka grass, these, in his hands, became
soon converted into a thunderbolt, O puissant one. Every blade of grass
there was seen to be converted into a terrible iron bolt. All this, know,
O king, was due to the curse denounced by Brahmanas. He who hurled a
blade of grass saw that it pierced through even such things as were
utterly impenetrable. In fact, every blade was seen to become a terrible
bolt having the force of thunder. Son killed sire, and sire killed son, O
Bharata. Inebriated with wine, they rushed and fell upon one another. The
Kukuras and the Andhakas met with destruction like insects rushing at a
blazing fire. As they were thus being slaughtered, no one among them
thought of escaping by fight. Knowing that the hour of destruction had
come, the mighty-armed Keshava stood there, eyeing everything. Indeed,
the slayer of Madhu stood, raising a bolt of iron formed of a blade of
grass. Beholding that Samva was slain, as also Charudeshna and Pradyumna
and Aniruddha, Madhava became filled with rage. Beholding Gada lying dead
on the ground, his wrath became enhanced. The wielder of Sarnga and the
discus and the mace then exterminated the Vrishnis and the Andhakas.
Hear, O king, what that conquerer of hostile towns, Vabhru of mighty
energy and Daruka then said to Krishna, O holy one, a very large number
of men has been slain by thee. Turn now to where Rama has gone. We wish
to go there where he has proceeded."
