
SECTION CLXIV
"Vaisampayana said, 'After Bhima had pledged himself to accomplish the
task, saying, 'I will do it,' the Pandavas, O Bharata, returned home with
the alms they had obtained during the day. Then Yudhishthira, the son of
Pandu from Bhima's countenance alone, suspected the nature of the task he
had undertaken to accomplish. Sitting by the side of his mother,
Yudhishthira asked her in private, 'What is the task, O mother, that
Bhima of terrible prowess seeketh to accomplish? Doth he do so at thy
command or of his own accord?' Kunti replied, 'Bhima, that chastiser of
foes, will at my command, do this great deed for the good of the Brahmana
and the liberation of this town.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'What rash act hast thou done, O mother! It is
difficult of being performed and almost amounteth to suicide! The learned
never applaud the abandonment of one's own child. Why dost thou, O
mother, wish to sacrifice thy own child for the sake of another's? Thou
hast, O mother, by this abandonment of thy child, acted not only against
the course of human practices but also against the teachings of the
Vedas, That Bhima, relying on whose arms we sleep happily in the night
and hope to recover the kingdom of which we have been deprived by the
covetous son of Dhritarashtra, that hero of immeasurable energy,
remembering whose prowess Duryodhana and Sakuni do not sleep a wink
during the whole night and by whose prowess we were rescued from the
palace of lac and various other dangers, that Bhima who caused the death
of Purochana, and relying on whose might we regard ourselves as having
already slain the sons of Dhritarashtra and acquired the whole earth with
all her wealth, upon what considerations, O mother, hast thou resolved
upon abandoning him? Hast thou been deprived of thy reason? Hath thy
understanding been clouded by the calamities thou hast undergone?'
"On hearing these words of her son, Kunti said, 'O Yudhishthira, thou
needst not be at all anxious on account of Vrikodara. I have not come to
this resolve owing to any weakness of understanding. Respected by him,
and with our sorrows assuaged, we have, O son, been living in the house
of this Brahmana, unknown to the sons of Dhritarashtra. For requiting, O
son, that Brahmana, I have resolved to do this. He, indeed, is a man upon
whom good offices are never lost. The measure of his requital becometh
greater than the measure of the services he receiveth. Beholding the
prowess of Bhima on the occasion of (our escape from) the house of lac,
and from the destruction also of Hidimva, my confidence in Vrikodara is
great. The might of Bhima's arms is equal unto that of ten thousand
elephants. It was, therefore, that he succeeded in carrying you all, each
heavy as an elephant, from Varanavata. There is no one on earth equal
unto Bhima in might; he may even overcome that foremost of warriors, the
holder of the thunderbolt himself. Soon after his birth he fell from my
lap on the breast of the mountain. By the weight of his body the mass of
stone on which he fell down broke in pieces. From this also, O son of
Pandu, I have come to know Bhima's might. For this reason have I resolved
to set him against the Brahmana's foe. I have not acted in this from
foolishness or ignorance or from motive of gain. I have deliberately
resolved to do this virtuous deed. By this act, O Yudhishthira, two
objects will be accomplished; one is a requital of the services rendered
by the Brahmana and the other is the acquisition of high religious merit.
It is my conviction that the Kshatriya who rendereth help unto a Brahmana
in anything acquireth regions of bliss hereafter. So also a Kshatriya who
saveth the life of a Kshatriya achieveth that great fame in this world as
in the other. A Kshatriya rendering help unto a Vaisya also on this earth
certainly acquires world-wide popularity. One of the kingly tribe should
protect even the Sudra who cometh to him for protection. If he doeth so,
in his next life he receiveth his birth in a royal line, commanding
prosperity and the respect of other kings. O scion of Puru's race, the
illustrious Vyasa of wisdom acquired by hard ascetic toil told me so in
bygone days. It is therefore, that I have resolved upon accomplishing
this.'"
