14
Vaishampayana said, "At the very outset the mighty-armed hero of
Dasharha's race understood from signs the intention of Drona's son.
Addressing Arjuna, he said, O Arjuna, O son of Pandu, the time is come
for the use of that celestial weapon which is in thy memory, knowledge of
which was imparted to thee by Drona. For protecting thyself as also thy
brothers, O Bharata, shoot in this battle that weapon which is capable of
neutralising all weapons.'
Thus addressed by Keshava, Arjuna, that slayer of hostile heroes, quickly
alighted from the car, taking with him his bow with shaft fixed on the
string. Softly wishing good unto the preceptor's son and then unto
himself, and unto all his brothers, that scorcher of foes then bowed unto
all the gods and all his superiors and let off his weapon, thinking of
the welfare of all the worlds and uttering the words, Let Ashvatthama's
weapon be neutralised by this weapon!'
That weapon, quickly let off by the wielder of gandiva, blazed up with
fierce flames like the all-destroying fire that appears at the end of the
yuga. Similarly, the weapon that had been shot by Drona's son of fierce
energy blazed up with terrible flames within a huge sphere of fire.
Numerous peals of thunder were heard; thousands of meteors fell; and all
living creatures became inspired with great dread. The entire welkin
seemed to be filled with noise and assumed a terrible aspect with those
flames of fire. The whole earth with her mountains and waters and trees,
trembled. Then the two great rishis, Narada, who is the soul of every
creature, and the grandsire of all the Bharata princes (Vyasa), beholding
those two weapons scorching the three worlds, showed themselves there.
The two rishis sought to pacify the two heroes Ashvatthama and
Dhananjaya. Conversant with all duties and desirous of the welfare of all
creatures, the two sages, possessed of great energy, stood in the midst
of those two blazing weapons. Incapable of being overwhelmed by any
force, those two illustrious rishis, placing themselves between the two
weapons, stood like two blazing fires. Incapable of being checked by any
creature endued with life, and adorned by the gods and danavas, they two
acted in this way, neutralising the energy of the two weapons and doing
good to all the world.
The two rishis said, "Those great car-warriors who have fallen in this
battle were acquainted with diverse kinds of weapons. They, however,
never shot such a weapon upon human beings. What act of rashness is this,
ye heroes, that ye have done?"
