3
Vaishampayana said: "Then Shakra, causing the firmament and the Earth to
be filled by a loud sound, came to the son of Pritha on a car and asked
him to ascend it. Beholding his brothers fallen on the Earth, king
Yudhishthira the just said unto that deity of a 1,000 eyes these words:
My brothers have all dropped down here. They must go with me. Without
them by me I do not wish to go to Heaven, O lord of all the deities. The
delicate princess (Draupadi) deserving of every comfort, O Purandara,
should go with us. It behoveth thee to permit this.
"Shakra said, Thou shalt behold thy brothers in Heaven. They have reached
it before thee. Indeed, thou shalt see all of them there, with Krishna.
Do not yield to grief, O chief of the Bharatas. Having cast off their
human bodies they have gone there, O chief of Bharatas race. As regards
thee, it is ordained that thou shalt go thither in this very body of
thine.
"Yudhishthira said, This dog, O lord of the Past and the Present, is
exceedingly devoted to me. He should go with me. My heart is full of
compassion for him.
"Shakra said, Immortality and a condition equal to mine, O king,
prosperity extending in all directions, and high success, and all the
felicities of Heaven, thou hast won today. Do thou cast off this dog. In
this there will be no cruelty.
"Yudhishthira said, O thou of a 1,000 eyes. O thou that art of righteous
behaviour, it is exceedingly difficult for one that is of righteous
behaviour to perpetrate an act that is unrighteous. I do not desire that
union with prosperity for which I shall have to cast off one that is
devoted to me.
"Indra said, There is no place in Heaven for persons with dogs. Besides,
the (deities called) Krodhavasas take away all the merits of such
persons. Reflecting on this, act, O king Yudhishthira the just. Do thou
abandon this dog. There is no cruelty in this.
"Yudhishthira said, It has been said that the abandonment of one that is
devoted is infinitely sinful. It is equal to the sin that one incurs by
slaying a Brahmana. Hence, O great Indra, I shall not abandon this dog
today from desire of my happiness. Even this is my vow steadily pursued,
that I never give up a person that is terrified, nor one that is devoted
to me, nor one that seeks my protection, saying that he is destitute, nor
one that is afflicted, nor one that has come to me, nor one that is weak
in protecting oneself, nor one that is solicitous of life. I shall never
give up such a one till my own life is at an end.
"Indra said, Whatever gifts, or sacrifices spread out, or libations
poured on the sacred fire, are seen by a dog, are taken away by the
Krodhavasas. Do thou, therefore, abandon this dog. By abandoning this dog
thou wilt attain to the region of the deities. Having abandoned thy
brothers and Krishna, thou hast, O hero, acquired a region of felicity by
thy own deeds. Why art thou so stupefied? Thou hast renounced everything.
Why then dost thou not renounce this dog? "Yudhishthira said, This is
well known in all the worlds that there is neither friendship nor enmity
with those that are dead. When my brothers and Krishna died, I was unable
to revive them. Hence it was that I abandoned them. I did not, however,
abandon them as long as they were alive. To frighten one that has sought
protection, the slaying of a woman, the theft of what belongs to a
Brahmana, and injuring a friend, each of these four, O Shakra, is I think
equal to the abandonment of one that is devoted."
Vaishampayana continued: "Hearing these words of king Yudhishthira the
just, (the dog became transformed into) the deity of Righteousness, who,
well pleased, said these words unto him in a sweet voice fraught with
praise.
"Dharma said: Thou art well born, O king of kings, and possessed of the
intelligence and the good conduct of Pandu. Thou hast compassion for all
creatures, O Bharata, of which this is a bright example. Formerly, O son,
thou wert once examined by me in the woods of Dwaita, where thy brothers
of great prowess met with (an appearance of) death. Disregarding both thy
brothers Bhima and Arjuna, thou didst wish for the revival of Nakula from
thy desire of doing good to thy (step-) mother. On the present occasion,
thinking the dog to be devoted to thee, thou hast renounced the very car
of the celestials instead of renouncing him. Hence. O king, there is no
one in Heaven that is equal to thee. Hence, O Bharata, regions of
inexhaustible felicity are thine. Thou hast won them, O chief of the
Bharatas, and thine is a celestial and high goal."
Vaishampayana continued: "Then Dharma, and Shakra, and the Maruts, and
the Ashvinis, and other deities, and the celestial Rishis, causing
Yudhishthira to ascend on a car, proceeded to Heaven. Those beings
crowned with success and capable of going everywhere at will, rode their
respective cars. King Yudhishthira, that perpetuator of Kurus race,
riding on that car, ascended quickly, causing the entire welkin to blaze
with his effulgence. Then Narada, that foremost of all speakers, endued
with penances, and conversant with all the worlds, from amidst that
concourse of deities, said these words: All those royal sages that are
here have their achievements transcended by those of Yudhishthira.
Covering all the worlds by his fame and splendour and by his wealth of
conduct, he has attained to Heaven in his own (human) body. None else
than the son of Pandu has been heard to achieve this.
"Hearing these words of Narada, the righteous-souled king, saluting the
deities and all the royal sages there present, said, Happy or miserable,
whatever the region be that is now my brothers, I desire to proceed to. I
do not wish to go anywhere else.
"Hearing this speech of the king, the chief of the deities, Purandara,
said these words fraught with noble sense: Do thou live in this place, O
king of kings, which thou hast won by thy meritorious deeds. Why dost
thou still cherish human affections? Thou hast attained to great success,
the like of which no other man has ever been able to attain. Thy
brothers, O delighter of the Kurus, have succeeded in winning regions of
felicity. Human affections still touch thee. This is Heaven. Behold these
celestial Rishis and Siddhas who have attained to the region of the gods.
"Gifted with great intelligence, Yudhishthira answered the chief of the
deities once more, saying, O conqueror of Daityas, I venture not to dwell
anywhere separated from them. I desire to go there, where my brothers
have gone. I wish to go there where that foremost of women, Draupadi, of
ample proportions and darkish complexion and endued with great
intelligence and righteous of conduct, has gone."
The end of Mahaprasthanika-parv
