13
Vaishampayana said, "Having said these words, that foremost of all
wielders of weapons, that delighter of all the Yadavas, mounted upon his
excellent car equipped with every kind of powerful weapons. Unto that
vehicle were yoked two pairs of foremost steeds of the Kamboja breed,
that were adorned with garlands of gold. The dhur of that best of cars
was of the hue of the morning sun. On the right was yoked the steed known
as Shaibya; on the left was placed Sugriva; the Parshni was borne by two
others called Meghapushpa and Balahaka. There was seen on that car a
celestial standard decked with gems and gold and created by the divine
Artificer, and standing high like the Maya (of Vishnu himself). Upon that
standard was Vinata's son (Garuda) shining with great splendour. Indeed,
that enemy of snakes perched on the standard-top of Keshava who is Truth
embodied.
Then Hrishikesha, that foremost of all bowmen, mounted on that car. After
him Arjuna of irresistible feats and Yudhishthira, the king of the Kurus,
ascended the same vehicle. Seated on that car, by the side of him of
Dasharha's race who wielded the bow called sharnga, the two sons of Pandu
looked exceedingly beautiful, like the twin Ashvinis seated by the side
of Vasava. Causing them to ascend on that car of his which was adored by
all the world, he of Dasharha's race urged those foremost of steeds
endued with great fleetness. Those steeds then suddenly flew, taking
after them that excellent vehicle ridden by the two sons of Pandu and by
that bull of Yadu's race. Endued with great speed, as those animals bore
away the wielder of sharnga, loud became the noise caused by their rush,
like that of birds coursing through the air.
Proceeding with great speed, they soon came up, O bull of Bharata's race,
with the mighty bowman Bhimasena in whose wake they had followed.
Although those great car-warriors met Bhima, they failed however to stop
that son of Kunti, as filled with wrath he proceeded fiercely towards the
foe. In the very sight of those illustrious and firm bowmen, Bhima, by
means of his very fleet steeds, proceeded towards the bank of the river
brought down by Bhagiratha. He beheld the high-souled and illustrious and
dark-complexioned and island-born Vyasa sitting near the edge of the
water in the midst of many rishis. And he also saw Drona's son of wicked
deeds sitting beside them, covered with dust, attired in a piece of cloth
made of kusha grass, and smeared all over with clarified butter. The
mighty-armed Bhimasena, the son of Kunti, taking up his bow with shaft
fixed on it, rushed towards Ashvatthama, and said, Wait, wait!'
Drona's son, beholding that terrible bowman coming towards him bow in
hand, and the two brothers on Janardana's car, became exceedingly
agitated and thought his hour had come. Of soul incapable of being
depressed, he called to his mind that high weapon (which he had obtained
from his sire). He then took up a blade of grass with his left hand.
Fallen into great distress, he inspired that blade of grass with proper
mantras and converted it into that powerful celestial weapon. Unable to
brook the arrows (of the Pandavas) and the presence of those wielders of
celestial weapons, he uttered in wrath these terrible words: For the
destruction of the Pandavas.' Having said these words, O tiger among
kings, the valiant son of Drona let off that weapon for stupefying all
the worlds. A fire then was born in that blade of grass, which seemed
capable of consuming the three worlds like the all-destroying Yama at the
end of the yuga."
