22
"Gandhari said, Slain by Bhimasena, behold, the lord of Avanti lies
there! Vultures and jackals and crows are feeding upon that hero! Though
possessed of many friends, he lies now perfectly friendless! Behold, O
slayer of Madhu, having made a great slaughter of foes, that warrior is
now lying on the bed of a hero, covered with blood. Jackals, and kankas,
and other carnivorous creatures of diverse kinds, are dragging him now.
Behold the reverses brought about by Time. His wives, assembled together,
and crying in grief, are sitting around that hero who in life was a
terrible slayer of foes but who now lies on the bed of a hero. Behold,
Pratipas son Bahlika, that mighty bowman possessed of great energy, slain
with a broad-headed shaft, is now lying on the ground like a sleeping
tiger. Though deprived of life, the colour of his face is still
exceedingly bright, like that of the moon at full, risen on the fifteenth
day of the lighted fortnight! Burning with grief on account of the death
of his son, and desirous of accomplishing his vow, Indras son (Arjuna)
hath slain there that son of Vriddhakshatra! Behold that Jayadratha, who
was protected by the illustrious Drona, slain by Partha bent on
accomplishing his vow, after penetrating through eleven Akshauhinis of
troops. Inauspicious vultures, O Janardana, are feeding upon Jayadratha,
the lord of the Sindhu-Sauviras, full of pride and energy! Though sought
to be protected by his devoted wives, see, O Acyuta, carnivorous
creatures are dragging his body away to a jungle in the vicinity. The
Kamboja and Yavana wives of that mighty-armed lord of the Sindhus and the
Sauviras are waiting upon him for protecting him (from the wild beasts).
At that time, O Janardana, when Jayadratha, assisted by the Kekayas,
endeavoured to ravish Draupadi, he deserved to be slain by the Pandavas!
From regard, however, for Duhshala, they set him free on that occasion.
Why, O Krishna, did they not show some regard for that Duhshala once
more? That daughter of mine, of tender years, is now crying in grief. She
is striking her body with her own hands and censuring the Pandavas. What,
O Krishna, can be a greater grief to me than that my daughter of tender
years should be a widow and all my daughters-in-law should become
lordless. Alas, alas, behold, my daughter Duhshala, having cast off her
grief and fears, is running hither and thither in search of the head of
her husband. He who had checked all the Pandavas desirous of rescuing
their son, after causing the slaughter of a vast force, at last himself
succumbed to death. Alas, those wives of his, with faces as beautiful as
the moon, are crying, sitting around that irresistible hero who resembled
an infuriated elephant!"
