7
Vaishampayana said: "That scorcher of foes, Vibhatsu, thus addressed by
his maternal uncle, replied, with great cheerlessness of heart, unto
Vasudeva who was equally cheerless, saying, O uncle, I am unable to look
at this Earth when she is reft of that hero of Vrishnis race and those my
other kinsmen. The king and Bhimasena and Sahadeva and Nakula and
Yajnaseni, numbering the sixth, are of the same mind with myself in this
matter. The time has come for the departure of the king also. Know this,
that the hour of our departure too is at hand. Thou art the foremost of
those that are well conversant with the course of time. I shall, however,
O chastiser of foes, first remove to Indraprastha the women of the
Vrishni race as also the children and the aged. Having said so unto his
uncle, Arjuna next addressed Daruka, saying, I wish to see without any
delay the chief officers of the Vrishni heroes. Having uttered these
words, the heroic Arjuna, grieving for those great car-warriors (who had
been slain), entered the great hall of the Yadavas (where they used to
hold their court), called Sudharma. When he had taken his seat there, all
the citizens, including the Brahmanas, and all the ministers of state
came and stood surrounding him. Then Partha, more grieved than they,
addressed those grieving and cheerless citizens and officers who were
more dead than alive, and said these words that were well suited to the
occasion: I shall take away with me the remnants of the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas. The sea will soon engulf this city. Equip all your cars and
place on them all your wealth. This Vajra (the grandson of Krishna) will
be your king at Shakraprastha. On the seventh day from this, at sunrise,
we shall set out. Make your preparations without delay.
"Thus addressed by Prithas son of pure deeds, all of them hastened their
preparations with eagerness for achieving their safety. Arjuna passed
that night in the mansion of Keshava. He was suddenly overwhelmed with
great grief and stupefaction. When morning dawned, Vasudeva of great
energy and prowess attained, through the aid of Yoga, to the highest
goal. A loud and heart-rending sound of wailing was heard in Vasudevas
mansion, uttered by the weeping ladies. They were seen with dishevelled
hair and divested of ornaments and floral wreaths. Beating their breasts
with their hands, they indulged in heart-rending lamentations. Those
foremost of women, Devaki and Bhadra and Rohini and Madira threw
themselves on the bodies of their lord. Then Partha caused the body of
his uncle to be carried out on a costly vehicle borne on the shoulders of
men. It was followed by all the citizens of Dwaraka and the people of the
provinces, all of whom, deeply afflicted by grief, had been well-affected
towards the deceased hero. Before that vehicle were borne the umbrella
which had been held over his head at the conclusion of the
horse-sacrifice he had achieved while living, and also the blazing fires
he had daily worshipped, with the priests that had used to attend to
them. The body of the hero was followed by his wives decked in ornaments
and surrounded by thousands of women and thousands of their
daughters-in-law. The last rites were then performed at that spot which
had been agreeable to him while he was alive. The four wives of that
heroic son of Sura ascended the funeral pyre and were consumed with the
body of their lord. All of them attained to those regions of felicity
which were his. The son of Pandu burnt the body of his uncle together
with those four wives of his, using diverse kinds of scents and perfumed
wood. As the funeral pyre blazed up, a loud sound was heard of the
burning wood and other combustible materials, along with the clear chant
of Samans and the wailing of the citizens and others who witnessed the
rite. After it was all over, the boys of the Vrishni and Andhaka races,
headed by Vajra, as also the ladies, offered oblations of water to the
high-souled hero.
"Phalguna, who was careful in observing every duty, having caused this
duty to be performed, proceeded, O chief of Bharatas race, next to the
place where the Vrishnis were slaughtered. The Kuru prince, beholding
them lying slaughtered all around, became exceedingly cheerless. He,
however, did what was required to be done in view of that which had
happened. The last rites were performed, according to the order of
seniority, unto the bodies of those heroes slain by the iron bolts born,
by virtue of the curse denounced by the Brahmanas, of the blades of Eraka
grass. Searching out the bodies then of Rama and Vasudeva, Arjuna caused
them to be burnt by persons skilled in that act. The son of Pandu, having
next performed duly those sraddha rites that are done to the dead,
quickly set out on the seventh day, mounting on his car. The widows of
the Vrishni heroes, wailing aloud, followed the high-souled son of Pandu.
Dhananjaya, on cars drawn by bullocks and mules and camels. All were in
deep affliction. The servants of the Vrishnis, their horsemen, and their
car-warriors too, followed the procession. The citizens and the
inhabitants of the country, at the command of Prithas son, set out at the
same time and proceeded, surrounding that cavalcade destitute of heroes
and numbering only women and the aged and the children. The warriors who
fought from the backs of elephants proceeded on elephants as huge as
hills. The foot-soldiers also set out, together with the reserves. The
children of the Andhaka and the Vrishni races, all followed Arjuna. The
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas, and wealthy Sudras, set out,
keeping before them the 16,000 women that had formed Vasudevas harem, and
Vajra, the grandson of the intelligent Krishna. The widows of the other
heroes of the Bhoja, the Vrishni, and the Andhaka races, lordless now,
that set out with Arjuna, numbered many millions. That foremost of
car-warriors, that conqueror of hostile towns, the son of Pritha,
escorted this vast procession of Vrishnis, which still abounded with
wealth, and which looked like a veritable ocean.
"After all the people had set out, the ocean, that home of sharks and
alligators, flooded Dvaraka, which still teemed with wealth of every
kind, with its waters. Whatever portion of the ground was passed over,
ocean immediately flooded over with his waters. Beholding this wonderful
sight, the inhabitants of Dvaraka walked faster and faster, saying,
Wonderful is the course of fate! Dhananjaya, after abandoning Dvaraka,
proceeded by slow marches, causing the Vrishni women to rest in pleasant
forests and mountains and by the sides of delightful streams. Arrived at
the country of the five waters, the puissant Dhananjaya planted a rich
encampment in the midst of a land that abounded with corn and kine and
other animals. Beholding those lordless widows escorted by Prithas son
alone O Bharata, the robbers felt a great temptation (for plunder). Then
those sinful wretches, with hearts overwhelmed by cupidity, those Abhiras
of ill omen, assembled together and held a consultation. They said, Here
there is only one bowman, Arjuna. The cavalcade consists of children and
the old. He escorts them, transgressing us. The warriors (of the
Vrishnis) are without energy. Then those robbers, numbering by thousands,
and armed with clubs, rushed towards the procession of the Vrishnis,
desirous of plunder. Urged by the perverse course of time they fell upon
that vast concourse, frightening it with loud leonine shouts and desirous
of slaughter. The son of Kunti, suddenly ceasing to advance along the
path, turned, with his followers, towards the place where the robbers had
attacked the procession. Smiling the while, that mighty-armed warrior
addressed the assailants, saying, You sinful wretches, forbear, if ye
love your lives. Ye will rue this when I pierce your bodies with my
shafts and take your lives. Though thus addressed by that hero, they
disregarded his words, and though repeatedly dissuaded, they fell upon
Arjuna. Then Arjuna endeavoured to string his large, indestructible,
celestial bow with some effort. He succeeded with great difficulty in
stringing it, when the battle had become furious. He then began to think
of his celestial weapons but they would not come to his mind. Beholding
that furious battle, the loss of the might of his arm, and the
non-appearance of his celestial weapons, Arjuna became greatly ashamed.
The Vrishni warriors including the foot-soldiers, the elephant-warriors,
and the car-men, failed to rescue those Vrishni women that were being
snatched away by the robbers. The concourse was very large. The robbers
assailed it at different points. Arjuna tried his best to protect it, but
could not succeed. In the very sightof all the warriors, many foremost of
ladies were dragged away, while others went away with the robbers of
their own accord. The puissant Arjuna, supported by the servants of the
Vrishnis, struck the robbers with shafts sped from Gandiva. Soon,
however. O king, his shafts were exhausted. In former days his shafts had
been inexhaustible. Now, however, they proved otherwise. Finding his
shafts exhausted, he became deeply afflicted with grief. The son of Indra
then began to strike the robbers with the horns of his bow. Those
Mlecchas, however, O Janamejaya, in the very sight of Partha, retreated,
taking away with them many foremost ladies of the Vrishnis and Andhakas.
The puissant Dhananjaya regarded it all as the work of destiny. Filled
with sorrow he breathed heavy sighs at the thought of the non-appearance
of his (celestial) weapons, the loss of the might of his arms, the
refusal of his bow to obey him, and the exhaustion of his shafts.
Regarding it all as the work of destiny, he became exceedingly cheerless.
He then ceased, O king, to make further efforts, saying, he had not the
power which he had before. The high-souled one, taking with him the
remnant of the Vrishni women, and the wealth that was still with them,
reached Kurukshetra. Thus bringing with him the remnant of the Vrishnis.
he established them at different places. He established the son of
Kritavarma at the city called Marttikavat, with the remnant of the women
of the Bhoja king. Escorting the remainder, with children and old men and
women, the son of Pandu established them, who were reft of heroes, in the
city of Indraprastha. The dear son of Yuyudhana, with a company of old
men and children and women, the righteous-souled Arjuna established on
the banks of the Sarasvati. The rule of Indraprastha was given to Vajra.
The widows of Akrura then desired to retire into the woods. Vajra asked
them repeatedly to desist, but they did not listen to him. Rukmini, the
princess of Gandhara, Saivya, Haimavati, and queen Jamvabati ascended the
funeral pyre. Satyabhama and other dear wives of Krishna entered the
woods, O king, resolved to set themselves to the practice of penances.
They began to live on fruits and roots and pass their time in the
contemplation of Hari. Going beyond the Himavat, they took up their abode
in a place called Kalpa. Those men who had followed Arjuna from
Dwaravati, were distributed into groups, and bestowed upon Vajra. Having
done all these acts suited to the occasion, Arjuna, with eyes bathed in
tears, then entered the retreat of Vyasa. There he beheld the Island-born
Rishi seated at his ease."
