45
"'Karna continued, "Thou shouldst know all this, O Shalya. I shall
however, again speak unto thee. Listen with close attention to what I
say. Once on a time a brahmana came to our house as a guest. Observing
our practices he became highly gratified and said unto us, 'I dwelt for a
long time on a peak of the Himavat quite alone. Since then I have seen
diverse countries following diverse religions. Never, however, have I
seen all the people of a country act unrighteously. All the races I have
met will admit that to be true religion which has been declared by
persons conversant with the Vedas. Travelling through various countries
following various religions, I at last, O king, came among the Vahikas.
There I heard that one at first becomes a brahmana and then he becomes a
kshatriya. Indeed, a Vahika would, after that, become a Vaishya, and then
a Shudra, and then a barber. Having become a barber, he would then again
become a brahmana. Returning to the status of a brahmana, he would again
become a slave. One person in a family becomes a brahmana: all the
others, falling off from virtue, act as they like. The Gandharas, the
Madrakas, and the Vahikas of little understanding are even such. Having
travelled through the whole world I heard of these practices, destructive
of virtue, of these sinful irregularities amongst the Vahikas.' Thou
shouldst know all this, O Shalya. I shall, however, again speak to thee
about those ugly words that another said unto me regarding the Vahikas.
In former days a chaste woman was abducted by robbers (hailing) from
Aratta. Sinfully was she violated by them, upon which she cursed them,
saying, 'Since ye have sinfully violated a helpless girl who am not
without a husband, therefore, the women of your families shall all become
unchaste. Ye lowest of men, never shall ye escape from the consequences
of this dreadful sin.' It is for this, O Shalya, that the sisters' sons
of the Arattas, and not their own sons, become their heirs. The Kauravas
with the Pancalas, the Salwas, the Matsyas, the Naimishas, the Koshalas,
the Kasapaundras, the Kalingas, the Magadhas, and the Cedis who are all
highly blessed, know what the eternal religion is. The wicked even of
these various countries know what religion is. The Vahikas, however, live
without righteousness. Beginning with the Matsyas, the residents of the
Kuru and the Pancala countries, the Naimishas as well and the other
respectable peoples, the pious among all races are conversant with the
eternal truths of religion. This cannot be said of the Madrakas and the
crooked-hearted race that resides in the country of the five rivers.
Knowing all these things, O king, hold thy tongue, O Shalya, like one
deprived of utterance, in all matters connected with religion and virtue.
Thou art the protector and king of that people, and, therefore, the
partaker of sixth part of their merits and demerits. Or perhaps, thou art
the partaker of a sixth part of their demerits only, for thou never
protectest them. A king that protects is a sharer in the merits of his
subjects. Thou art not a sharer in their merits. In days of yore, when
the eternal religion was reverenced in all countries, the Grandsire,
observing the practices of the country of the five rivers, cried fie on
them. When even in the krita age, Brahman had censured the practices of
those fallen people of evil deeds who were begotten by Shudras on others'
wives, what would you now say to men in the world? Even thus did the
Grandsire condemn the practices of the country of the five waters. When
all people were observant of the duties of their respective orders, the
Grandsire had to find fault with these men. Thou shouldst know all this,
O Shalya. I shall, however, again speak to thee. A Rakshasa of the name
of Kalmashapada, while plunging in a tank, said, 'Eleemosynation is a
kshatriya's dirt, while the non-observance of vows is a brahmana's dirt.
The Vahikas are the dirt of the Earth, and the Madra women are the dirt
of the whole female sex. While sinking in the stream, a king rescued the
Rakshasa. Asked by the former, the latter gave this answer. I will recite
it to you. Listen to me. 'The mlecchas are the dirt of mankind: the
oilmen are the dirt of the Mlecchas; eunuchs are the dirt of oilmen; they
who avail of the priestly ministrations of Kshatriyas, in their
sacrifices, are the dirt of eunuchs. The sin of those again that have the
last-named persons for their priests, of also of the Madrakas, shall be
thine if thou do not abandon me.' Even this was declared by the Rakshasa
to be the formula that should be used for curing a person possessed by a
Rakshasa or one killed by the energy of a poison. The words that follow
are all very true. The Pancalas observe the duties enjoined in the Vedas;
the Kauravas observe truth; the Matsyas and the Surasenas perform
sacrifices, the Easterners follow the practices of the Shudras; the
Southerners are fallen; the Vahikas are thieves; the Saurashtras are
bastards. They that are defiled by ingratitude, theft, drunkenness,
adultery with the wives of their preceptors, harshness of speech,
slaughter of kine, lustful wanderings during the night out of home, and
the wearing of other people's ornaments,--what sin is there that they do
not incur? Fie on the Arattas and the people of the country of the five
rivers! Commencing with the Pancalas, the Kauravas, the Naimishas, the
Matsyas,--all these,--know what religion is. The old men among the
Northerners, the Angas, the Magadhas, (without themselves knowing what
virtue is) follow the practices of the pious. Many gods, headed by Agni,
dwell in the East. The pitris dwell in the South that is presided over by
Yama of righteous deeds. The West is protected by the mighty Varuna who
overlooks the other gods there. The north is protected by the divine Soma
along with the Brahmanas. So Rakshasas and Pishacas protect the Himavat,
the best of mountains. The Guhyakas, O great king, protect the mountains
of Gandhamadana. Without doubt, Vishnu, otherwise, called Janardana,
protects all creatures. (For all that the Vahikas have no especial
protectors among the gods). The Magadhas are comprehenders of signs; the
Koshalas comprehend from what they see; the Kurus and the Pancalas
comprehend from a half-uttered speech; the Salwas cannot comprehend till
the whole speech is uttered. The Mountaineers, like the Sivis, are very
stupid. The Yavanas, O king, are omniscient; the Suras are particularly
so. The mlecchas are wedded to the creations of their own fancy. Other
peoples cannot understand. The Vahikas resent beneficial counsels; as
regards the Madrakas there are none amongst those (mentioned above.)
Thou, O Shalya, art so. Thou shouldst not reply to me. The Madrakas are
regarded on Earth as the dirt of every nation. So the Madra woman is
called the dirt of the whole female sex. They that have for their
practices the drinking of spirits, the violation of the beds of their
preceptors, the destruction of the embryo by procuring miscarriage, and
the robbing of other people's wealth, there is no sin that they have not.
Fie on the Arattas and the people of the country of the five rivers.
Knowing this, be silent. Do not seek to oppose me. Do not let me slay
Keshava and Arjuna, having slain thee first.'"
"'Shalya said, "The abandonment of the afflicted and the sale of wives
and children are, O Karna, prevalent amongst the Angas whose king thou
art. Recollecting those faults of thine that Bhishma recited on the
occasion of the tale of Rathas and Atirathas, drive away thy wrath. Do
not be angry. Brahmanas may be found everywhere; Kshatriyas may be found
everywhere; so also Vaishyas and Shudras, O Karna, women of chastity and
excellent vows may also be found everywhere. Everywhere men take delight
in jesting with men and wounding one another. Lustful men also may be
found everywhere. Everyone on every occasion can command skill in
speaking of the faults of others. No one, however, knows his own faults,
or knowing them, feels shame. Everywhere are kings devoted to their
respective religions, and employed in chastising the wicked. Everywhere
may be found virtuous men. It cannot be, O Karna, that all the people of
a country are sinful. There are men in many countries that surpass the
very gods by their behaviour.'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'Then king Duryodhana stopped Karna and Shalya (from
going on with their wordy warfare), addressing the son of Radha as a
friend, and beseeching Shalya with joined hands, Karna, O sire, was
quieted by thy son and forbore saying anything more. Shalya also then
faced the enemy. Then Radha's son, smiling, once more urged Shalya,
saying, "Proceed."'"
