10
"Sanjaya said, 'After the fall of the mighty bowman Drona on that day, O
Bharata, and after the purpose had been baffled of that mighty
car-warriors, viz., the son of Drona, and after the vasty army, O
monarch, of the Kauravas had fled away, Partha, having arrayed his own
troops, stayed on the field with his brothers. Perceiving him staying on
the field, thy son, O bull of Bharata's race, seeing his own army running
away, rallied them with great courage. Having caused his divisions to
take up their stand, thy son, O Bharata, relying on the might of his
arms, fought for a long time with his foes, the Pandavas, who, having
gained their end, were filled with joy and had been struggling for hours
together. On the approach there of the evening twilight, he caused the
troops to be withdrawn. Having caused the withdrawal of their troops, and
having entered their own encampment, the Kauravas held with one another a
consultation about their own welfare, seated like the celestials on
costly couches overlaid with rich coverlets, and on excellent seats and
luxurious beds. Then king Duryodhana, addressing those mighty bowmen in
agreeable and highly sweet expression, spoke the following words suited
to the occasion.
"'Duryodhana said, "Ye foremost of intelligent men, declare all of you,
without delay, your opinions! Under these circumstances, ye kings, what
is necessary and what is still more necessary?'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'When that prince of men had spoken those words,
those lions among men, seated on their thrones, made various gestures
expressive of their desire of battle. Observing the indications of those
who were all desirous of pouring their lives as libations on the
battle-fire, and beholding the monarch's face radiant as morning Sun, the
preceptor's son endued with intelligence and accomplished in speech, said
these words: "Enthusiasm, opportunity, skill and policy,--these are the
means declared by the learned, to be capable of accomplishing all ends.
They are, however, dependent on destiny. Those foremost of men we had on
our side, equal unto the celestials, mighty car-warriors all, possessed
of policy, devoted, accomplished, and loyal, have been slain. For all
that we should not despair of victory. If all these means be properly
applied, even destiny may be made propitious. All of us, therefore, O
Bharata, shall install Karna, that foremost of men, endued besides with
every accomplishment, in the command of the army! Making Karna our
commander, we shall crush our foes. This Karna is endued with great
might; he is a hero, accomplished in weapons, and incapable of defeat in
battle. Irresistible as Yama himself, he is quite competent to vanquish
our foes in battle!" Hearing these words from the preceptor's son, O
king, at that time, built great hopes on Karna. Cherishing the hope in
his heart that after the fall of Bhishma and Drona, Karna would vanquish
the Pandavas, and comforted (by it), O Bharata, Duryodhana then, filled
with joy at having heard those words of Ashvatthama, steadying his mind
and relying on the might of his arms, said unto Radha's son, O monarch,
these words that were fraught with affection and regard, and that were
true, delightful, and beneficial to himself: "O Karna, I know thy
prowess, and the great friendship thou bearest to me! For all that, O
mighty-armed one, I shall address the certain words that are for my good!
Having heard them, O hero, do that which may appear desirable to thee!
Thou art endued with great wisdom, and thou art even my supreme refuge!
Those two Atirathas that were my Generals, viz., Bhishma and Drona, have
been slain. Be thou my General, thou that art mightier than they! Both of
those great bowmen were advanced in years. They were, besides, partial to
Dhananjaya. Still both those heroes were respected by me, O son of Radha,
at thy word! Viewing his relationship of grandsire unto them, the sons of
Pandu, O sire, were spared in dreadful battle by Bhishma for ten
successive days! Thyself also having laid aside thy weapons, the valiant
Bhishma was slain in great battle by Phalguni with Shikhandi before him!
After that great bowman had fallen and betaken himself to his bed of
arrows, it was at thy word, O tiger among men, that Drona was made our
leader! By him also were the sons of Pritha spared, in consequence, as I
think, of their relationship unto him of pupils. That old man also has
been slain by Dhrishtadyumna more speedily. I do not see, even on
reflection, another warrior equal to thee in battle,--thee, that is,
whose prowess could not be measured by even those two foremost of
warriors that have been slain in the fight! Without doubt, thou alone
today art competent to win victory for us! Before, in the middle, and
later on, thou hast accordingly acted for our good. Therefore, like a
leader, it behoveth thee, in this battle, to bear the burden thyself.
Thyself install thy own self in the Generalship. Like the celestial
generalissimo, the lord Skanda of unfading prowess, (supporting the
celestial army), do thou support this Dhartarashtra host! Like Mahendra
slaying the Danavas, destroy thou all the throngs of our foes! Beholding
thee staying in battle, the Pandavas, those mighty car-warriors, will,
with the Pancalas, fly away from battle, like the Danavas at sight of
Vishnu. Do thou, therefore lead this vast force! When thou shalt stand
resolved on the field, the Pandavas of wicked hearts, the Pancalas, and
the Srinjayas, will all fly away with their friends. As the risen Sun,
scorching everything by his energy, destroyeth the thick gloom, even so
do thou destroy our foes!'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'Strong became that hope, O king, in the heart of thy
son, viz., that where Bhishma and Drona had been slain, Karna would
vanquish the Pandavas. Cherishing that hope within his heart, he said
unto Karna, "O Suta's son, Partha never wishes to fight, standing before
thee!" Karna said, "I have, O son of Gandhari, said before in thy
presence, even these words, vanquish all the Pandavas with their sons and
Janardana!' I shall become thy General. In this there is no doubt.
Tranquilise thyself, O monarch I Consider the Pandavas to be already
vanquished!'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'Thus addressed, O monarch, king Duryodhana then
stood up with all the monarchs, like He of a hundred sacrifices with the
gods, for honouring Karna with the command of the army, like the
celestials for honouring Skanda. Then, O monarch, all the kings headed by
Duryodhana, desirous of victory, installed Karna in the command,
according to the rites enjoined by the ordinance. With golden and earthen
jars filled to the brim with water and sanctified with mantras, with
tusks of elephants and horns of rhinoceroses and mighty bulls, with other
vessels decked with jewels and gems, with also fragrant herbs and plants,
and with other articles collected in abundance, Karna, seated at his ease
on a seat made of udumvara wood and overlaid with silken cloth, was
invested with the command, according to the rites in the scriptures.
Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas, and respectable shudras, praised that
high-souled one after he was bathed on that excellent seat. Thus
installed in the command, O king, that slayer of foes, the son of Radha,
caused, by presents of Niskas and kine and other wealth, many foremost of
brahmanas to utter blessings on him. "Vanquish the Parthas with Govinda
and all their followers," even these were the words that the eulogists
and the brahmanas said (unto him), O bull among men! (And they also said)
"Slay the Parthas and the Pancalas, O son of Radha, for our victory, like
risen Sun ever destroying Darkness with his fierce rays! The son of Pandu
with Keshava are not able to even look at the shafts shot by thee, like
owls unable to gaze at the burning rays of the Sun! The Parthas with the
Pancalas are incapable of standing before thee armed with weapons, like
the danavas before Indra in battle!" Installed in the command, Radha's
son of incomparable splendour looked resplendent in beauty and radiance
like a second Sun. Having installed the son of Radha (thus) in the
command of the army, thy son, urged on by Death, regarded himself as one
who had his purpose accomplished. That chastiser of foes, Karna, also, O
king, having obtained the command, ordered the troops to be arrayed, at
the rise of the Sun. Surrounded by thy sons, O Bharata, Karna looked
resplendent like Skanda surrounded by the celestials, in the battle
having Saraka for its evil root.'"
