47
"Dhritarashtra said, 'When the two armies, duly arrayed, thus mingled
with each other for battle, O Sanjaya, how did Partha assail the
samsaptakas, and how Karna assail the Pandavas? Tell me the incidents of
the battle in detail, for thou art skilled in narration. Listening to the
accounts of the prowess of heroes in battle, I am never satiated.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Observing the vast hostile force stationed in that
manner, Arjuna arrayed his troops in proper form, in consequence of the
evil policy of thy son. The vast Pandava force then, teeming with
horsemen and elephants and foot-soldiers and cars, and headed by
Dhrishtadyumna, looked exceedingly magnificent. With his steeds white as
pigeons, the son of Prishata, equal in splendour to the Sun or the Moon,
armed with bow, looked resplendent like Death himself in embodied form.
The sons of Draupadi, desirous of battle, stood by the side of the son of
Prishata. They were clad in excellent coats of mail, and armed with
excellent weapons, and all of them were endued with the prowess of
tigers. Possessed of effulgent bodies, they followed their maternal uncle
like the stars appearing with the Moon. Beholding the samsaptakas
standing in array, Arjuna, with wrath excited, rushed against them,
drawing his bow Gandiva. The samsaptakas then, desirous of slaying
Arjuna, rushed against Partha, firmly resolved on victory, and making
death their goal. That brave host of heroes, teeming with men, steeds,
infuriate elephants, and cars, began very quickly to afflict Arjuna.
Their encounter with Kiritin (Arjuna) became exceedingly furious. That
encounter resembled the one that took place between Arjuna and the
Nivatakavachas, as we have heard. Partha cut off cars and steeds and
standards and elephants and foot-soldiers engaged in fight, with shafts
and bows and swords and discs and battle axes, and uplifted arms with
weapons in grasp, and the heads also of foes, by thousands upon
thousands. The samsaptakas, regarding the car of Partha sunk in that deep
vortex of warriors, uttered loud roars. Partha, however, slaying all his
foes in front, slew those that stood further off, and then those that
were on his right and his back, like Rudra himself in rage slaughtering
all created things endued with life. The encounter that took place when
the Pancalas, the Cedis, and the Srinjayas faced thy troops was
exceedingly fierce. Kripa and Kritavarma, and Shakuni the son of Subala,
those heroes difficult of defeat in battle, accompanied by troops that
were all cheerful, themselves filled with rage, and capable of smiting
down thick ranks of cars, fought with the Koshalas, the Kasis, the
Matsyas, the Karusas, the Kaikayas, and the Surasenas, all of whom were
possessed of great courage. That battle fraught with great slaughter and
destructive of body, life and sins, became conducive to fame, heaven, and
virtue, in respect of the Kshatriya, the Vaishya, and the Shudra heroes
that were engaged in it. Meanwhile the Kuru king Duryodhana with his
brothers, O bull of Bharata's race, and supported by many Kuru heroes and
many mighty Madraka car-warriors, protected Karna while the latter was
engaged in battle with the Pandavas, the Pancalas, the Cedis, and
Satyaki. Destroying that vast division with his sharp arrows, and
crushing many foremost of car-warriors Karna succeeded in afflicting
Yudhishthira. Cutting off the armour, the weapons, and the bodies of
thousands of foes and slaying his foes by thousands and sending them to
heaven and making them earn great fame, Karna caused his friends great
joy. Thus, O sire, that battle destructive of men, steeds, and cars,
between the Kurus and the Srinjayas, resembled the battle between the
gods and the Asuras of old.'"
