
SECTION CLXIII
"Kunti said, Grieve not at all, O Brahmana, on account of this danger. I
see a way by which to rescue thee from that Rakshasa. Thou hast only one
son, who, besides, is of very tender years, also only one daughter, young
and helpless, so I do not like that any of these, or thy wife, or even
thyself should go unto the Rakshasa. I have five sons, O Brahmana, let
one of them go, carrying in thy behalf tribute of that Rakshasa.'
"Hearing this, the Brahmana replied, 'To save my own life I shall never
suffer this to be done. I shall never sacrifice, to save myself, the life
of a Brahmana or of a guest. Indeed, even those that are of low origin
and of sinful practices refuse to do (what thou askest me to do). It is
said that one should sacrifice one's self and one's offspring for the
benefit of a Brahmana. I regard this advice excellent and I like to
follow it too. When I have to choose between the death of a Brahmana and
that of my own, I would prefer the latter. The killing of a Brahmana is
the highest sin, and there is no expiation for it. I think a reluctant
sacrifice of one's own self is better than the reluctant sacrifice of a
Brahmana. O blessed lady, in sacrificing myself I do not become guilty of
self-destruction. No sin can attach to me when another will take my life.
But if I deliberately consent to the death of a Brahmana, it would be a
cruel and sinful act, from the consequence of which there is no escape.
The learned have said that the abandonment of one who hath come to thy
house or sought thy protection, as also the killing of one who seeketh
death at thy hands, is both cruel and sinful. The illustrious among those
conversant with practices allowable in seasons of distress, have before
now said that one should never perform an act that is cruel and
censurable. It is well for me that I should today perish myself with my
wife, but I would never sanction the death of a Brahmana.'
"Kunti said, 'I too am firmly of opinion, O Brahmana, that Brahmanas
should ever be protected. As regards myself, no son of mine would be less
dear to me even if I had a hundred instead of the five I have. But this
Rakshasa will not be able to kill my son, for that son of mine is endued
with great prowess and energy, and skilled in mantras. He will faithfully
deliver to the Rakshasa his food, but will, I know to a certainty, rescue
himself. I have seen before many mighty Rakshasas of huge bodies engaged
in combat with my heroic son and killed too by him. But, O Brahmana, do
not disclose this fact to anybody, for if it be known, persons desirous
of obtaining this power, will, from curiosity, always trouble my sons.
The wise have said that if my son imparteth any knowledge, without the
assent of his preceptor, unto any person, my son himself will no longer
be able to profit by that knowledge.'
"Thus addressed by Pritha, the Brahmana with his wife became exceedingly
glad and assented to Kunti's speech, which was unto them as nectar. Then
Kunti, accompanied by the Brahmana, went unto the son of Vayu (Bhima) and
asked him to accomplish (that difficult task). Bhima replied unto them,
saying, 'So be it.'"
