10
Vaishampayana said, "After that night had gone away, the driver of
Dhrishtadyumna's car gave intelligence to king Yudhishthira of the great
slaughter that had been caused during the hour of sleep.
The driver said, "The sons of Draupadi, O king, have been slain, with all
the children of Drupada himself, while they were heedless and trustfully
asleep in their own camp! During the night, O king, thy camp has been
exterminated by the cruel Kritavarma, and Kripa, the son of Gautama, and
the sinful Ashvatthama! Slaying thousands of men and elephants and steeds
with lances and darts and battle-axes, those men have exterminated thy
army. While thy army was being slaughtered like a forest cut down with
axes, a loud wail was heard rising from thy camp. I am the sole survivor,
O monarch, of that vast force. I have, O thou of virtuous soul, escaped
with difficulty from Kritavarma at a time when he was heedless!"
Hearing these evil tidings, Kunti's son Yudhishthira, however, capable of
bearing up (against foes), fell down on the earth, afflicted with grief
at the loss of his sons. Advancing forward, Satyaki held the king in his
embrace. Bhimasena and Arjuna and the two sons of Madri also stretched
forth their arms. Having recovered his senses, the son of Kunti lamented
in great affliction, uttering these words rendered indistinct by sorrow:
"Alas, having vanquished the foe, we have ourselves been vanquished in
the end! The course of events is difficult to be ascertained even by
persons endued with spiritual sight. The foes, who were vanquished have
become victorious! Ourselves, again, while victorious, are vanquished!
Having slain brothers and friends and sires and sons and well-wishers,
and kinsmen, and counsellors, and having vanquished them all, we
ourselves are vanquished at last! Misery looks like prosperity and
prosperity looks like misery! This our victory has assumed the shape of
defeat. Our victory, therefore, has ended in defeat! Having won the
victory, I am obliged to grieve as an afflicted wretch. How, then, can I
regard it as a victory? In reality, I have been doubly defeated by the
foe. They for whose sake we have incurred the sin of victory by slaying
our kinsmen and friends, alas, they, after victory had crowned them, have
been vanquished by defeated foes that were heedful!
Alas, through heedlessness have they been slain that had escaped from
even Karna, that warrior who had barbed arrows and nalikas for his teeth,
the sword for his tongue, the bow for his gaping mouth, and the twang of
the bowstring and the sound of palms for his roars--that angry Karna who
never retreated from battle, and who was a very lion among men! Alas,
those princes that succeeded in crossing, by boats constituted by their
own excellent weapons, the great Drona-ocean having cars for its deep
lakes, showers of arrows for its waves, the ornaments of warriors for its
gems, car-steeds for its animals, darts and swords for its fishes,
elephants for its alligators, bows for its whirlpools, mighty weapons for
its foam, and the signal of battle for its moonrise causing it to swell
with energy, and the twang of the bowstring and the sound of palms for
its roar,--alas, even those princes have from heedlessness been slain!
There is, in this world, no more powerful cause of death, as regards men,
than heedlessness! Prosperity abandons a heedless man from every side,
and every kind of misery overtakes him. The tall standard with excellent
top that stood on his car was the wreath of smoke that infallibly
indicated the Bhishma-fire. Shafts constituted its flames, and wrath was
the wind that fanned it! The twang of his formidable bow and the sound of
his palms constituted the roar of that fire. Armour and diverse kinds of
weapons were the homa libations that were poured into it. The vast
hostile army was the heap of dry forest-grass that was assailed by that
fire. Alas, even they that had endured that fierce fire whose terrible
energy was represented by the mighty weapons in Bhishma's hand have at
last fallen through heedlessness.
A heedless person can never acquire knowledge, asceticism, prosperity, or
great renown. Behold, Indra has obtained great happiness after slaying
all his foes heedfully. Behold the survivors among our foes have, through
our heedlessness, slain so many sons and grandsons of kings, each of whom
was really like Indra himself. Alas, they have perished like merchants
with rich freight perishing through carelessness in a shallow stream
after having crossed the great ocean. They whose bodies are now lying on
the bare ground, slain by those vindictive wretches, have without doubt
ascended to heaven.
I grieve, however, for the princess Krishna. Alas, she will be plunged
today in an ocean of grief. Hearing of the slaughter of her brothers and
sons and her venerable sire, the king of the Pancalas, without doubt she
will fall down senseless on the earth. Her body emaciated by grief, she
will not rise again. Unable to bear the grief resulting from such
affliction, and worthy as she is of happiness, alas, what will be her
plight? Cut to the quick by the slaughter of her sons and brothers, she
will be like one scorched by fire.'
Having in deep affliction indulged in these lamentations, that king of
Kuru's race then addressed Nakula, saying, Go and bring the unfortunate
princess Draupadi here along with all her maternal relations.' Obediently
accepting that command of the king who equalled Yama himself in
righteousness, Nakula speedily proceeded on his car to the quarters of
Draupadi where that princess resided with all the wives of the Pancala
king. Having despatched the son of Madri, Yudhishthira, crushed by grief,
proceeded with tears in his eyes accompanied by those friends of his, to
the field on which his sons had battled and which still teemed with
diverse kinds of creatures. Having entered that cursed field abounding
with fierce sights, the king saw his sons, well-wishers, and friends, all
lying on the ground, covered with blood, their bodies mangled, and heads
separated from their trunks. Beholding them in that plight, Yudhishthira,
that foremost of righteous men, became deeply afflicted. That chief of
the Kurus then began to weep aloud and fell down on the earth, deprived
of his senses, along with all his followers."
