
SECTION CLXV
"Having heard these words of his mother, Yudhishthira said, 'What thou, O
mother, hast deliberately done, moved by compassion for the afflicted
Brahmana, is, indeed, excellent Bhima will certainly come back with life,
after having slain the cannibal, inasmuch as thou art, O mother, always
compassionate unto Brahmanas. But tell the Brahmana, O mother, that he
doth not do anything whereby the dwellers in this town may know all about
it, and make him promise to keep thy request.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then, when the night passed away, Bhimasena,
the son of Pandu, taking with him the Rakshasa's food set out for the
place where the cannibal lived. The mighty son of Pandu, approaching the
forest where the Rakshasa dwelt, began to eat himself the food he
carried, calling loudly to the Rakshasa by name. The Rakshasa, inflamed
with anger at Bhima's words, came out and approached the place where
Bhima was.
"Of huge body and great strength, of red eyes, red beard, and red hair,
he was terrible to behold, and he came, pressing deep the earth with his
tread. The opening of his mouth, was from ear to ear and his ears
themselves were straight as arrows. Of grim visage, he had a forehead
furrowed into three lines. Beholding Bhima eating his food, the Rakshasa
advanced, biting his nether lip and expanding his eyes in wrath. And
addressing Bhima he said, 'Who is this fool, who desiring to go to the
abode of Yama, eateth in my very sight the food intended for me?' Hearing
these words, Bhima, O Bharata, smiled in derision and disregarding the
Rakshasa, continued eating with averted face. Beholding this, the
cannibal uttered a frightful yell and with both arms upraised ran at
Bhima desiring to kill him, there and then. Even then disregarding the
Rakshasa and casting only a single glance at him, Vrikodara, that slayer
of hostile heroes continued to eat the Rakshasa's food. Filled with wrath
at this, the Rakshasa struck, from behind with both his arms a heavy blow
on the back of Vrikodara, the son of Kunti. But Bhima, though struck
heavily by the mighty Rakshasa, with both his hands, did not even look up
at the Rakshasa but continued to eat as before. Then the mighty Rakshasa,
inflamed with wrath, tore up a tree and ran at Bhima for striking him
again. Meanwhile the mighty Bhima, that bull among men had leisurely
eaten up the whole of that food and washing himself stood cheerfully for
fight. Then, O Bharata, possessed of great energy, Bhima, smiling in
derision, caught with his left hand the tree hurled at him by the
Rakshasa in wrath. Then that mighty Rakshasa, tearing up many more trees,
hurled them at Bhima, and the Pandava also hurled as many at the
Rakshasa. Then, O king, the combat with trees between that human being
and the Rakshasa, became so terrible that the region around soon became
destitute of trees. Then the Rakshasa, saying that he was none else than
Vaka, sprang upon the Pandava and seized the mighty Bhima with his arms.
That mighty hero also clasping with his own strong arms the strong-armed
Rakshasa, and exerting himself actively, began to drag him violently.
Dragged by Bhima and dragging Bhima also, the cannibal was overcome with
great fatigue. The earth began to tremble in consequence of the strength
they both exerted, and large trees that stood there broke in pieces. Then
Bhima, beholding the cannibal overcome with fatigue, pressed him down on
the earth with his knees and began to strike him with great force. Then
placing one knee on the middle of the Rakshasa's back, Bhima seized his
neck with his right hand and the cloth on his waist with his left, and
bent him double with great force. The cannibal then roared frightfully.
And, O monarch, he also began to vomit blood while he was being thus
broken on Bhima's knee.'"
