35
"'Duryodhana said, "Even thus did that illustrious Deity, that Grandsire
of all the worlds, viz., Brahman, act as driver on that occasion and even
thus did Rudra become the warrior. The driver of the car, O hero, should
be superior to the warrior on it. Therefore, O tiger among men, do thou
hold the reins of the steeds in this battle. As on that occasion the
Grandsire had been selected with care by all the celestials, indeed, O
great king, as one greater than Sankara, so thou that art superior to
Karna art now selected by us with care. Like the Grandsire holding the
reins of Rudra's steeds, do thou hold, without delay, the reins of
Karna's steeds in battle, O thou of great splendour."
"'Shalya said, "O foremost of men, many a time have I heard this
excellent and celestial history, recited to me, of those two lions among
gods. Indeed, I have heard how the Grandsire acted as the driver of Bhava
and how the Asuras also, O Bharata, were all destroyed with one shaft.
Krishna also had knowledge of all this before, the knowledge, viz., of
how the illustrious Grandsire had become the driver on that occasion of
yore. Indeed, Krishna knoweth the past and the future with all their
details. Knowing this fact, he became the driver, O Bharata, of Partha
like the Self-create becoming the driver of Rudra. If the Suta's son, by
some means, succeeds in slaying the son of Kunti, Keshava, beholding
Partha slain, will fight himself. That bearer of the conch, the discus,
and the mace, will then consume thy army. There is no king here that will
stay in the ranks in front of that illustrious one of Vrishni's race when
he will be excited with wrath.'"
"Sanjaya said, 'Unto the ruler of the Madras who was speaking in that
strain, that chastiser of foes, viz., thy mighty-armed son of cheerful
soul replied, saying, "Do not, O mighty-armed one, think disparagingly of
Karna, otherwise called Vaikartana, in battle,--that warrior who is the
foremost of all wielders of arms and who is acquainted with the meaning
of the whole body of our scriptures. Hearing the terrible and loud twang
of his bow and the sound of his palms, the Pandava troops fly away on all
sides. Thou hast witnessed it with thy own eyes, O mighty-armed one, how
Ghatotkaca, screened by his illusions and displaying hundreds of still
slain that night (by Karna). Feeling a great fear all these days Vibhatsu
could never stand, fronting Karna. The mighty Bhimasena also, moved
hither and thither by the horn of Karna's bow, was, O king, addressed in
very harsh words such as 'Fool' and 'Glutton.' The two brave sons of
Madri also were defeated by Karna in great battle, though, from some
object he had in view, he did not, O sire, slay them then. That foremost
one of Vrishni's race, viz., the heroic Satyaki, the chief of the Satwata
clan, was vanquished by Karna and made carless. Others, such as all the
Srinjayas headed by Dhrishtadyumna, have been repeatedly defeated in
battle by Karna the great car-warrior who has achieved all these feats
and who excited with wrath, is competent to slay Purandara himself armed
with the thunderbolt in fight. Thyself also, O hero, art acquainted with
every weapon. Thou art, again, the master of all branches of learning.
There is none on Earth who is thy equal in might of arms. Irresistible in
prowess, thou art like a dart (Shalya) unto thy enemies. It is for this,
O king, that thou O slayer of foes, art called 'Shalya.' Encountering the
might of thy arms, all the Satwatas were unable to get the better of it.
Is Krishna superior to thee in might of arms, O king? Indeed, as Krishna
is to bear the burthen of the Pandava troops upon the slaughter of
Partha, even so art thou to bear the burthen of this vast (Kaurava) force
if Karna lays down his life. Why should he be able to resist my troops
and why shouldst not thou be able to slay the hostile troops, O sire? For
thy sake, O sire, I would willingly follow the footsteps of my (slain)
brothers and the other heroic kings of the Earth."
"'Shalya said, "O son of Gandhari, when thou, O giver of honours,
describest me before thy troops to be superior to the son of Devaki, I am
exceedingly gratified with thee. I accept the drivership of the
celebrated son of Radha when he will fight with that foremost of the sons
of Pandu, as thou desirest. I have, however, O hero, a compact to make
with Vaikartana, and that is this: I will utter whatever words I may
wish, in this one's presence.'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'Thy son then, O king, with Karna, O sire, answered
the ruler of the Madras, saying, "Let it be so" in the presence of all
the kshatriyas. Assured by Shalya's acceptance of the drivership,
Duryodhana, filled with joy, embraced Karna. Eulogised (by bards and
panegyrists around), thy son then once more addressed Karna, saying,
"Slay all the Parthas in battle, like the great Indra slaying the
Danavas." Shalya having accepted the office of holding the reins of his
steeds, Karna, with a cheerful heart, once more addressed Duryodhana,
saying, "The ruler of the Madras does not say very cheerfully what he
says. O king, solicit him once more in sweet words." Thus addressed, the
mighty king Duryodhana, possessed of great wisdom and accomplished in
everything, once more spoke unto that lord of Earth, viz., Shalya, the
ruler of Madras, in a voice deep as that of the clouds and filling the
whole region there with the sound of that voice: "O Shalya, Karna thinks
that he should fight with Arjuna today. O tiger among men hold the reins
of Karna's steeds in battle. Having slain all the other warriors Karna
desires to slay Phalguna. I solicit thee, O king, repeatedly, in the
matter of holding the reins of his steeds. As Krishna, that foremost of
all drivers, is the counsellor of Partha, even so do thou protect the son
of Radha today from every danger.'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'Embracing thy son then, Shalya the ruler of the
Madras, joyfully answered that slayer of foes, viz., Duryodhana, saying,
"If this is what is thou thinkest, O royal son of Gandhari, O thou of
handsome features, I shall, for that, accomplish everything that may be
agreeable to thee. O chief of the Bharatas, for whatever acts I may be
fit, employing myself therein with my whole heart, I will bear the
burthen of those acts of thine. Let Karna, however, and thyself pardon me
all those words, agreeable or disagreeable, that I may speak unto Karna
from desire of his good.'"
"'Karna said, "O ruler of the Madras, be thou ever engaged in our good as
Brahman in that of Ishana, as Keshava in that of Partha."
"'Shalya said, "These four kinds of conduct--self-rebuke and self-praise,
speaking ill of others, and adulation of others, are never practised by
those that are respectable. That, however, O learned one, which I shall
say, for inspiring thy confidence is fraught with self-adulation. For all
that, listen to it duly. O puissant one, like Matali himself, I am fit to
act as the driver of even Indra in watchfulness, in managing the steeds,
in knowledge of coming danger and of the means of avoiding it, and in
competence to avoid it in practice. When thou wilt be engaged in battle
with Partha, I will hold the reins of thy steeds. Let thy anxiety be
dispelled, O Suta's son."'"
