36
"'Duryodhana said, "This one, O Karna, will act as thy driver, this ruler
of the Madras, who is superior to Krishna, like Matali the driver of the
chief of the celestials. Indeed, as Matali taketh the management of the
car unto which the steeds of Indra are attached, even so will Shalya be
the driver of the steeds of thy car today. With thyself as warrior on
that vehicle and the ruler of the Madras as its driver, that foremost of
car will certainly vanquish the Parthas in battle.'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'When the morning came, O monarch, Duryodhana once
more addressed the ruler of the Madras endued with great activity,
saying, "O ruler of the Madras, hold the reins in battle of Karna's
foremost of steeds. Protected by thee, the son of Radha will vanquish
Dhananjaya." Thus addressed, Shalya, answering, "So be it" ascended the
car, O Bharata. When Shalya approached that car, Karna with a cheerful
heart addressed his driver, saying, "O charioteer, quickly equip the car
for me." Having duly equipped that triumphal car, the foremost of its
kind, which resembled the vapoury mansions in the sky, Shalya presented
it to Karna, saying, "Blessed be thou, victory to thee." Then Karna, that
foremost of car-warriors, duly worshipping that car which had in days of
old been sanctified by a priest conversant with Brahma, and
circumambulating it and carefully adoring the god Surya addressed the
ruler of the Madras standing near, saying, "Ascend the vehicle."
Thereupon Shalya of mighty energy ascended that large, invincible, and
foremost of cars, belonging to Karna like a lion ascending a mountain
summit. Beholding Shalya stationed, Karna ascended his excellent car like
the Sun riding on a mass of clouds charged with lightning. Mounted on the
same car, those two heroes endued with the splendour or the Sun of fire
looked resplendent like Surya and Agni sitting together on a cloud in the
firmament. Eulogised then (by bards and panegyrists), those two heroes of
great effulgence looked like Indra and Agni adored with hymns in a
sacrifice by Ritwiks and Sadasyas. Karna stood on that car, the reins of
whose steeds were held by Shalya, stretching his formidable bow, like the
Sun himself within a halo of circular light. Stationed on that foremost
of cars, that tiger among men, Karna, with his shafts constituting his
rays, looked beautiful like the Sun on the Mandara mountains. Unto the
mighty-armed son of Radha that warrior of immeasurable energy, stationed
on his car for battle. Duryodhana said these words, "O son of Adhiratha,
O hero, do thou achieve that feat difficult of accomplishment which Drona
and Bhishma have not achieved in the very sight of all the bowmen. I had
always believed that those two mighty car-warriors, viz., Bhishma and
Drona, would without doubt slay Arjuna and Bhimasena in battle. Like a
second wielder of the thunderbolt, O son of Radha, do thou in great
battle achieve that feat worthy of a hero which was not achieved by those
two. Either seize king Yudhishthira the just or slay Dhananjaya and
Bhimasena, O son of Radha, and the twin sons of Madri. Blessed be thou,
let victory be thine. Set out for battle, O tiger among men. Reduce to
ashes all the troops of Pandu's son." Then thousands of trumpets and tens
of thousands of drums, sounded together, produced a noise like that of
the clouds in the welkin. Accepting those words (of Duryodhana), the
foremost of car-warriors stationed on his car, viz., the son of Radha,
addressed Shalya, that warrior accomplished in battle, saying, "Urge the
steeds, O mighty-armed one, so that I may slay Dhananjaya and Bhimasena
and both the twins and king Yudhishthira. O Shalya, let Dhananjaya behold
today the might of my arms, when I will be engaged in shooting shafts
winged with Kanka feathers in hundreds and thousands. Today, O Shalya, I
will shoot shafts with great energy for the destruction of the Pandavas
and the victory of Duryodhana."
"'"Shalya said, "O Suta's son, why dost thou think so low of the sons of
Pandu, all of whom are endued with great might, all of whom are great
bowmen, and all of whom are acquainted with every weapon? They are
unretreating, of great good fortune, invincible, and of prowess incapable
of being baffled. They are capable of inspiring fear in the heart of
Indra himself. When, son of Radha thou wilt hear the twang of Gandiva in
battle, resembling the peal of the thunder itself, thou wilt not then
utter such speeches. When thou wilt behold Dharma's son and the twins
causing a canopy, like that of the clouds in the welkin, with their sharp
arrows, and the other invincible kings (of the Pandava army), endued with
great lightness of hands and shooting (showers of shafts) and weakening
their foes, then thou wilt not utter such words.'"
"Sanjaya continued, 'Disregarding those words spoken by the ruler of the
Madras, Karna addressing him endued with great activity, saying,
"Proceed."'"
