27
"Sanjaya said, 'The white steeded (Arjuna) also, O monarch, routed thy
force even as the winds, approaching a heap of cotton, scatters it on all
sides. Against him rushed the Trigartas, the Sivis, the Kauravas, the
Salwas, the samsaptakas, and that force which consisted of the Narayanas.
And Satyasena and Candradeva, and Mitradeva and Satrunjaya, and Susruta's
son, and Citrasena, and Mitravarman, O Bharata, and the king of the
Trigartas surrounded by his brothers and by his sons that were all mighty
bowmen accomplished in diverse weapons, suddenly advanced, shooting and
scattering showers of shafts in that battle, against Arjuna, like a
fierce current of water towards the ocean. Those warriors in hundreds of
thousands, approaching Arjuna, seemed to melt away like snakes at sight
of Garuda. Though slaughtered in battle, they did not still leave the son
of Pandu like insects, O monarch, never receding from a blazing fire.
Satyasena, in that encounter, pierced that son of Pandu with three
arrows, and Mitradeva pierced him with three and sixty, and Candradeva
with seven. And Mitravarman pierced him with three and seventy arrows,
and Susruta's son with seven. And Satrunjaya pierced him with twenty, and
Susharma with nine. Thus pierced in that encounter by many, Arjuna
pierced all those kings in return. Indeed, piercing the son of Susruta
with seven arrows, he pierced Satyasena with three, Satrunjaya with
twenty and Candradeva with eight, Mitradeva with a hundred, Srutasena
with three, Mitravarman with nine, and Susharma with eight. Then slaying
king Satrunjaya with a number of arrows whetted on stone, he smote off
from his trunk, the head, decked with headgear, of Susruta's son. Without
any delay he then, with a number of other shafts, despatched Candradeva
to the abode of Yama. As regards the other mighty car-warriors vigorously
contending with him, he checked each of them with five arrows. Then
Satyasena filled with rage, hurled a formidable lance in that battle
aiming at Krishna and uttered a leonine roar. That ironmouthed lance
having a golden shaft, piercing through the left arm of the high-souled
Madhava, penetrated into the Earth. Madhava being thus pierced with that
lance in great battle the goad and the reins, O king, fell down from his
hands. Beholding Vasudeva's limb pierced through, Pritha's son Dhananjaya
mustered all his wrath and addressing Vasudeva said, "O mighty-armed one,
bear the car to Satyasena, O puissant one, so that I may, with keen
shafts, despatch him to Yama's abode." The illustrious Keshava then,
quickly taking up the goad and the reins, caused the steeds to bear the
car to the front of Satyasena's vehicle. Beholding the Ruler of the
Universe pierced, Pritha's son Dhananjaya, that mighty car-warrior,
checking Satyasena with some keen arrows, cut off with a number of
broad-headed shafts of great sharpness, the large head of that king
decked with earrings, from off his trunk at the head of the army. Having
thus cut off Satyasena's head, he then despatched Citravarman with a
number of keen shafts, and then the latter's driver, O sire, with a keen
calf-toothed arrow. Filled with rage, the mighty Partha then, with
hundreds of shafts, felled the samsaptakas in hundreds and thousands.
Then, O king, with a razor-headed arrow equipped with wings of silver,
that mighty car-warrior cut off the head of the illustrious Mitrasena.
Filled with rage he then struck Susharma in the shoulder-joint. Then all
the samsaptakas, filled with wrath, encompassed Dhananjaya on all sides
and began to afflict him with showers of weapons and make all the points
of the compass resound with their shouts. Afflicted by them thus, the
mighty car-warrior Jishnu, of immeasurable soul, endued with prowess
resembling that of Sakra himself, invoked the Aindra weapon. From that
weapon, thousands of shafts, O king, began to issue continually. Then O
king, a loud din was heard of falling cars with standards and quivers and
yokes, and axles and wheels and traces with chords, of bottoms of cars
and wooden fences around them, of arrows and steeds and spears and
swords, and maces and spiked clubs and darts and lances and axes, and
Sataghnis equipped with wheels and arrows. Thighs and necklaces and
Angadas and Keyuras, O sire, and garlands and cuirasses and coats of
mail, O Bharata, and umbrellas and fans and heads decked with diadems lay
on the battle-field. Heads adorned with earrings and beautiful eyes, and
each resembling the full moon, looked, as they lay on the field, like
stars in the firmament. Adorned with sandal-paste, beautiful garlands of
flowers and excellent robes, many were the bodies of slain warriors that
were seen to lie on the ground. The field of battle, terrible as it was,
looked like the welkin teeming with vapoury forms. With the slain princes
and kshatriyas of great might and fallen elephants and steeds, the Earth
became impassable in that battle as if she were strewn with hills. There
was no path on the field for the wheels of the illustrious Pandava's car,
engaged as he was in continually slaying his foes and striking down
elephants and steeds with his broad-headed shafts. It seemed, O sire,
that the wheels of his car stopped in fright at the sight of his own self
careering in that battle through that bloody mire. His steeds, however,
endued with the speed of the mind or the wind, dragged with great efforts
and labour those wheels that had refused to move. Thus slaughtered by
Pandu's son armed with the bow, that host fled away almost entirely,
without leaving even a remnant, O Bharata, contending with the foe.
Having vanquished large numbers of the samsaptakas in battle, Pritha's
son Jishnu looked resplendent, like a blazing fire without smoke.'"
