38
"Sanjaya said 'After Karna, gladdening thy army, had set out for battle,
he spoke unto every Pandava soldier that he met with, even these words:
"Unto him that will today point out the high-souled Dhananjaya of white
steeds to me, I will give whatever wealth he desires. If having got it he
does not become satisfied, I shall in addition, give him,--him that is,
that will discover Arjuna to me, a cart-load of jewels and gems. If that
does not satisfy the person who discovers Arjuna to me, I will give him a
century of kine with as many vessels of brass for milking those animals.
I will give a hundred foremost of villages unto the person that discovers
Arjuna to me. I will also give him that shows Arjuna to me a number of
long-tressed damsels of black eyes and a car unto which shall be yoked
white mules. If that does not satisfy the person that discovers Arjuna to
me, I shall give him another foremost of cars, made of gold, and having
six bulls yoked unto it that shall be as large as elephants. I shall also
give unto him a hundred damsels decked with ornaments, with collars of
gold, fair-complexioned and accomplished in singing and dancing. If that
does not satisfy the person that discovers Arjuna to me, I shall give him
a 100 elephants, a 100 villages and a 100 cars, and 10,000 steeds of the
foremost of breed, fat, docile, endued with many excellent qualities,
capable of dragging cars and well-trained. I shall also give to the
person that discovers Arjuna to me four hundred kine, each with golden
horns and her calf. If that does not satisfy the person that discovers
Arjuna to me, I shall make him a more valuable gift, viz., five hundred
steeds, adorned with trappings of gold and decked with jewelled
ornaments. I shall also give eighteen other steeds of great docility. I
shall also give the person that discovers Arjuna to me a bright car made
of gold and adorned with diverse ornaments and having foremost of Kamboja
steeds yoked unto it. If that does not satisfy the person that discovers
Arjuna to me, I shall make him a more valuable gift, viz., six hundred
elephants, with chains of gold around their necks, and covered with
housings of gold, born in the western shores of the ocean, and trained by
elephant trainers. If that does not satisfy the person that discovers
Arjuna to me, I shall make him a more valuable gift, viz., fourteen
Vaishya villages, teeming with people, full of wealth, situated in the
proximity of forests and rivers, free from all sorts of danger, well
furnished (with other necessaries), and worthy of being enjoyed by kings.
To him that will discover Dhananjaya to me, I shall also give a hundred
female slaves, with golden collars, belonging to the country of the
Magadhas, and of very youthful age. If that does not satisfy the person
that discovers Arjuna to me, I will make him a more valuable gift, that,
indeed, which he himself will solicit. Sons, wives and articles of
pleasure and enjoyment that I have, these all I shall give him if he
desires them. Indeed, unto him who discovers Keshava and Arjuna to me, I
shall, after slaying those two, give all the wealth that may be left by
them." Having uttered those diverse speeches in that battle, Karna blew
his excellent conch, sea-born and producing a sweet blare. Hearing these
words of Suta's son that were suitable to his disposition, Duryodhana, O
king, with all his followers became filled with joy. At that juncture the
beat of cymbals and drums and leonine shouts, and grunts of elephants
with the sounds of diverse musical instruments, arose there, O king,
among the (Kaurava) troops, O bull among men. The shouts also of warriors
filled with joy arose there. When the (Kaurava) troops were thus filled
with joy, the ruler of the Madras, laughing in scorn, said these words
unto that grinder of foes, viz., the son of Radha, that mighty
car-warrior who was about to plunge into that ocean of battle and who was
indulging in such vain bragging.'"
