43
"Sanjaya said, 'That chastiser of foes, viz., the son of Radha, thus
silencing the ruler of the Madras, once more addressed him, O monarch,
saying these words, "In answer to that which, O Shalya, thou hast said
unto me by way of instance, I tell thee that I am incapable of being
frightened by thee in battle with thy words. If all the gods themselves
with Vasava would fight with me, I would not still feel any fear, what
need be said then of my fears from Pritha and Keshava? I am incapable of
being frightened by means of words alone. He, O Shalya, whom thou wouldst
be able to frighten in battle is some other person (and not myself)! Thou
hast spoken many bitter words to me. Therein lieth the strength of a
person that is low. Incapable of speaking of my merits, thou sayst many
bitter things, O thou of wicked heart; Karna was never born, O Madraka,
for fear in battle. On the other hand, I was born for displaying valour
as also for achieving glory for my own self. For the sake of my
friendship for thee, for my affection, and for thy being an ally,--for
these three reasons thou still livest, O Shalya. Important is the task
that has now to be done for king Dhritarashtra. That task, O Shalya,
depends on me. For this, thou livest a moment. Before this, I made a
compact with thee that any disagreeable speeches thou mightest utter
would be pardoned by me. That compact should be observed. It is for this
that thou livest, O Madraka. Without a 1,000 Salyas I would vanquish my
foes. He that injureth a friend is sinful. It is for this that thou
livest for the present.'"
