
SECTION CLXXIII
"Arjuna said, 'Thou hast addressed me (more than once) as Tapatya. I
therefore wish to know what the precise significance of this word is, O
virtuous Gandharva, being sons of Kunti, we are, indeed, Kaunteyas. But
who is Tapati that we should be called Tapatyas?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, the Gandharva related to
Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, the (following) story well-known in the
three worlds.'
"The Gandharva said, 'O son of Pritha, O foremost of all intelligent men,
I will duly recite to you in full this charming narrative. O, listen with
attention to what I say in explanation of why I have addressed thee as
Tapatya. That one in heaven who pervadeth by his light the whole
firmament had a daughter named Tapati equal unto himself. Tapati, the
daughter of the god Vivaswat, was the younger sister of Savitri, and she
was celebrated throughout the three worlds and devoted to ascetic
penances. There was no woman amongst the celestials, the Asuras, the
Yakshas, the Rakshasas, the Apsaras, and the Gandharvas, who was equal to
her in beauty. Of perfect, symmetrical and faultless features, of black
and large eyes, and in beautiful attire, the girl was chaste and of
perfect conduct. And, O Bharata, seeing her Savitri (the sun) thought
that there was none in the three worlds who, for his beauty,
accomplishments, behaviour, and learning, deserved to be her husband.
Beholding her attain the age of puberty and, therefore, worthy of being
bestowed on a husband, her father knew no peace of mind, always thinking
of the person he should select. At that time, O son of Kunti, Riksha's
son, that bull amongst the Kurus, the mighty king Samvarana, was duly
worshipping Surya with offerings of Arghya and flower-garlands and
scents, and with vows and fasts and ascetic penances of various kinds.
Indeed, Samvarana was worshipping Surya constantly in all his glory, with
devotion and humility and piety. And beholding Samvarana conversant with
all rules of virtue and unequalled on earth for beauty, Surya regarded
him as the fit husband for his daughter, Tapati. And, O thou of Kuru's
race, Vivaswat then resolved to bestow his daughter on that best of
kings, viz., Samvarana, the scion of a race of world-wide fame. As Surya
himself in the heavens filleth the firmament with his splendour, so did
king Samvarana on earth fill every region with the splendour of his good
achievements. And all men, O Partha, except Brahmanas, worshipped
Samvarana. Blest with good luck, king Samvarana excelled Soma in soothing
the hearts of friends and Surya in scorching the hearts of foes. And, O
Kaurava, Tapana (Surya) himself was resolved upon bestowing his daughter
Tapati upon king Samvarana, who was possessed of such virtues and
"Once on a time, O Partha, king Samvarana, endued with beauty (of person)
and immeasurable prowess, went on a hunting expedition to the under-woods
on the mountain-breast. While wandering in quest of deer, the excellent
steed the king rode, overcome, O Partha, with hunger, thirst and fatigue,
died on the mountains. Abandoning the steed, the king, O Arjuna, began to
wander about upon the mountain-breast on foot and in course of his
wandering the monarch saw a maiden of large eyes and unrivalled beauty,
That grinder of hostile host--that tiger among kings--himself without a
companion, beholding there that maiden without a companion, stood
motionless gazing at her steadfastly. For her beauty, the monarch for
some moment believed her to be (the goddess) Sri herself. Next he
regarded her to be the embodiment of the rays emanating from Surya. In
splendour of her person she resembled a flame of fire, though in
benignity and loveliness she resembled a spotless digit of the moon. And
standing on the mountain-breast, the black-eyed maiden appeared like a
bright statue of gold. The mountain itself with its creepers and plants,
because of the beauty and attire of that damsel, seemed to be converted
into gold. The sight of that maiden inspired the monarch with a contempt
for all women that he had seen before. By beholding her, the king
regarded his eye-sight truly blessed. Nothing the king had seen from the
day of his birth could equal, he thought, the beauty of that girl. The
king's heart and eyes were captivated by that damsel, as if they were
bound with a cord and he remained rooted to that spot, deprived of his
senses. The monarch thought that the artificer of so much beauty had
created it only after churning the whole world of gods Asuras and human
beings. Entertaining these various thoughts, king Samvarana regarded that
maiden as unrivalled in the three worlds for wealth of beauty.
"And the monarch of pure descent, beholding the beautiful maiden, was
pierced with Kama's (Cupid's) shafts and lost his peace of mind. Burnt
with the strong flame of desire the king asked that charming maiden,
still innocent, though in her full youth, saying, 'Who art thou and
whose? Why also dost thou stay here? O thou of sweet smiles, why dost
thou wander alone in these solitary woods? Of every feature perfectly
faultless, and decked with every ornament, thou seemest to be the coveted
ornament of these ornaments themselves! Thou seemest not to be of
celestial or Asura or Yaksha or Rakshasa or Naga or Gandharva or human
origin. O excellent lady, the best of women that I have ever seen or
heard of would not compare with thee in beauty! O thou of handsome face,
at sight of thee lovelier than the moon and graced with eyes like
lotus-petals, the god of desire is grinding me.'
"King Samvarana thus addressed that damsel in the forest, who however,
spoke not a word unto the monarch burning with desire. Instead, like
lightning in the clouds, that large-eyed maiden quickly disappeared in
the very sight of the monarch. The king then wandered through the whole
forest, like one out of his senses, in search of that girl of eyes like
lotus-petals. Failing to find her, that best of monarchs indulged in
copious lamentations and for a time stood motionless with grief.'"
