63
"Sanjaya said, 'Meanwhile Karna also began, with his arrowy showers, to
afflict the mighty car-warriors of the Kaikayas, viz., those great bowmen
that stood before him. Indeed, the son of Radha despatched to Yama's
abode full five hundred of those warriors that were employed in checking
him in that battle. Beholding the son of Radha to be irresistible in that
battle, those warriors, afflicted with the arrows of their assailant,
repaired to the presence of Bhimasena. Breaking that car-force into many
parts by means of his arrows, Karna, singly and riding on that same car
of his, pursued Yudhishthira, who then, exceedingly mangled with arrows
and almost insensible, was proceeding slowly for reaching the Pandava
encampment with Nakula and Sahadeva on his two sides. Having approached
the king, the Suta's son, from desire of doing good to Duryodhana,
pierced the son of Pandu with three formidable arrows. In return, the
king pierced Radha's son in the centre of the chest and then his driver
with three shafts. Then those two scorchers of foes, viz., the twin sons
of Madri, those two protectors of Yudhishthira's car-wheels, rushed
towards Karna so that the latter might not succeed in slaying the king.
Then Nakula and Sahadeva, both shooting showers of shafts with great
care, covered the son of Radha therewith. The valiant son of the Suta,
however, in return, pierced those two high-souled chastisers of foes with
two broad-headed arrows of great sharpness. The son of Radha then slew
Yudhishthira's excellent steeds, white as ivory and fleet as the mind,
and having black hair in their tails. Then, smiling the while, the Suta's
son, that great bowman, with another broadheaded shaft, felled the
head-gear of Kunti's son. Similarly, the valiant Karna, having slain the
steeds of Nakula, cut off the car shafts and bow of that intelligent son
of Madri. Those two steedless and carless sons of Pandu,--those two
brothers,--thereupon ascended the car of Sahadeva. Beholding those two
brothers made carless, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., their
maternal uncle, the ruler of the Madras, moved by compassion, addressed
the son of Radha and said, "Thou art to fight today with Pritha's son
Phalguna. Why dost thou then, with rage inflamed to such a pitch, battle
with Dharma's royal son? Thou art suffering thy weapons to be exhausted.
Thy own armour is being weakened. With thy shafts reduced, and without
quivers, with thy driver and steeds fatigued, and thyself mangled by foes
with weapons, when thou wilt approach Partha, O son of Radha, thou wilt
be an object of derision and mirth." Though thus addressed by the ruler
of the Madras, Karna still, filled with rage, continued to assail
Yudhishthira in battle. And he continued to pierce the two sons of Madri
by Pandu with many keen arrows. Smiling the while, by means of his shafts
he made Yudhishthira turn his face from the battle. Then Shalya,
laughing, once more said unto Karna as the latter, excited with great
wrath and resolved upon Yudhishthira's destruction stood on his car,
these words, "Him for whose sake Dhritarashtra's son always honours thee,
slay that Partha, O son of Radha. What wouldst thou gain by slaying
Yudhishthira? The two Krishnas are blowing their conchs, whose loud blare
is being heard. The twang also of Arjuna's bow is being heard, like the
roar of the clouds in the season of rains. There, Arjuna, striking down
the foremost of our car-warriors with his arrowy down-pours, is devouring
all our troops. Behold him, O Karna, in this battle. The two that are
protecting his rear are Yudhamanyu and Uttamauja. The brave Satyaki is
protecting his left wheel, and Dhrishtadyumna is protecting his right
wheel. There, Bhimasena is fighting with the royal son of Dhritarashtra.
Act in such way, O son of Radha, that Bhima may not be able to slay the
king today in the sight of us all,--that the king may, indeed, escape
him. Behold, Duryodhana is brought under the power of Bhimasena, that
ornament of battle. Approaching if thou canst rescue him, it will,
indeed, be a very wonderful feat. Going thither, rescue the king, for a
great peril has overtaken him. What wilt thou gain by slaying the sons of
Madri or king Yudhishthira?" Hearing these words of Shalya, O lord of
Earth, and beholding Duryodhana overpowered by Bhima in that dreadful
battle, the valiant son of Radha, thus urged by the words of Shalya and
exceedingly desirous of rescuing the king, left Ajatasatru and the twin
sons of Madri by Pandu, and rushed for rescuing thy son. He was borne by
his steeds that were fleet as birds and that were urged by the ruler of
the Madras. After Karna had gone away, Kunti's son Yudhishthira
retreated, borne, O sire, by the fleet steeds of Sahadeva. With his twin
brothers accompanying him, that ruler of men, quickly repairing in shame
to the (Pandava) camp, his body exceedingly mangled with shafts, alighted
from the car and hastily sat down on an excellent bed. The, arrows then
being extracted from his body, the royal son of Pandu, his heart
exceedingly afflicted with sorrow's dart, addressed his two brothers,
viz., those two mighty car-warriors, the sons of Madri, saying, "Repair
quickly to the division of Bhimasena. Roaring like a cloud, Vrikodara is
engaged in battle." Riding another car, Nakula, that bull among
car-warriors, and Sahadeva of great energy,--those two brothers, those
two crushers of foes,--both endued with great might, then proceeded
towards Bhima, borne by steeds of the utmost fleetness. Indeed, the
brothers having together repaired to Bhimasena's division, took up their
places there.'"
