16
"Sanjaya said, 'Then, O lord, thy troops, with Shalya at their head, once
more rushed against the Parthas in that battle with great impetuosity.
Although afflicted, still these troops of thine, who were fierce in
battle, rushing against the Parthas, very soon agitated them in
consequence of their superior numbers. Struck by the Kurus, the Pandava
troops, in the very sight of the two Krishnas, stayed not on the field,
though sought to be checked by Bhimasena. Filled with rage at this,
Dhananjaya covered Kripa and his followers, as also Kritavarma, with
showers of shafts. Sahadeva checked Shakuni with all his forces. Nakula
cast his glances on the ruler of the Madras from one of his flanks. The
(five) sons of Draupadi checked numerous kings (of the Kuru army). The
Pancala prince Shikhandi resisted the son of Drona. Armed with his mace,
Bhimasena held the king in check, and Kunti's son Yudhishthira resisted
Shalya at the head of his forces. The battle then commenced once more
between those pairs as they stood, among thy warriors and those of the
enemy, none of whom had ever retreated from fight. We then beheld the
highly wonderful feat that Shalya achieved, since, alone, he fought with
the whole Pandava army. Shalya then, as he stayed in the vicinity of
Yudhishthira in that battle, looked like the planet Saturn in the
vicinity of the Moon. Afflicting the king with shafts that resembled
snakes of virulent poison, Shalya rushed against Bhima, covering him with
showers of arrows. Beholding that lightness of hand and that mastery over
weapons displayed by Shalya the troops of both the armies applauded him
highly. Afflicted by Shalya the Pandavas, exceedingly mangled, fled away,
leaving the battle, and disregarding the cries of Yudhishthira commanding
them to stop. While his troops were thus being slaughtered by the ruler
of the Madras, Pandu's son, king Yudhishthira the just, became filled
with rage. Relying upon his prowess, that mighty car-warrior began to
afflict the ruler of the Madras, resolved to either win the battle or
meet with death. Summoning all his brothers and also Krishna of Madhu's
race, he said unto them, "Bhishma, and Drona, and Karna, and the other
kings, that put forth their prowess for the sake of the Kauravas, have
all perished in battle. You all have exerted your valour according to
your courage and in respect of the shares allotted to you. Only one
share--mine--that is constituted by the mighty car-warrior Shalya,
remains. I desire to vanquish that ruler of the Madras today in battle.
Whatever wishes I have regarding the accomplishment of that task I will
now tell you. These two heroes, the two sons of Madravati, will become
the protectors of my wheels. They are counted as heroes incapable of
being vanquished by Vasava himself. Keeping the duties of a Kshatriya
before them, these two that are deserving of every honour and are firm in
their vows, will fight with their maternal uncle. Either Shalya will slay
me in battle or I will slay him. Blessed be ye. Listen to these true
words, you foremost of heroes in the world. Observant of Kshatriya
duties, I will fight with my maternal uncle, you lords of Earth, firmly
resolved to either obtain victory or be slain. Let them that furnish cars
quickly supply my vehicle, according to the rules of science, with
weapons and all kinds of implements in a larger measure than Shalya's.
The grandson of Sini will protect my right wheel, and Dhrishtadyumna my
left. Let Pritha's son Dhananjaya guard my rear today. And let Bhima,
that foremost of all wielders of weapons, fight in my front. I shall thus
be superior to Shalya in the great battle that will occur." Thus
addressed by the king, all his well-wishers did as they were requested.
Then the Pandava troops once more became filled with joy, especially the
Pancalas, the Somakas and the Matsyas. Having made that vow, the king
proceeded against the ruler of the Madras. The Pancalas then blew and
beat innumerable conchs and drums and uttered leonine roars. Endued with
great activity and filled with rage, they rushed, with loud shouts of
joy, against the ruler of the Madras, that bull among the Kurus. And they
caused the Earth to resound with the noise of the elephants' bells, and
the loud blare of conchs and trumpets. Then thy son and the valiant ruler
of the Madras, like the Udaya and the Asta hills, received those
assailants. Boasting of his prowess in battle, Shalya poured a shower of
arrows on that chastiser of foes, king Yudhishthira the just, like
Maghavat pouring rain. The high-souled king of the Kurus also having
taken up his beautiful bow displayed those diverse kinds of lessons that
Drona had taught him. And he poured successive showers of arrows
beautifully, quickly, and with great skill. As he careered in battle,
none could mark any lapses in him. Shalya and Yudhishthira, both endued
with great prowess in battle, mangled each other, like a couple of tigers
fighting for a piece of meat. Bhima was engaged with thy son, that
delighter in battle. The Pancala prince (Dhrishtadyumna), Satyaki, and
the two sons of Madri by Pandu, received Shakuni and the other Kuru
heroes around. In consequence of thy evil policy, O king, there again
occurred in that spot an awful battle between thy warriors and those of
the foe, all of whom were inspired with the desire of victory. Duryodhana
then, with a straight shaft, aiming at the gold-decked standard of Bhima,
cut off in that battle. The beautiful standard of Bhimasena, adorned with
many bells, fell down, O giver of honours. Once more the king, with a
sharp razor-faced arrow, cut off the beautiful bow of Bhima that looked
like the trunk of an elephant. Endued with great energy, the bowless
Bhima then, putting forth his prowess pierced the chest of thy son with a
dart. At this, thy son sat down on the terrace of his car. When
Duryodhana swooned away, Vrikodara once more, with razor-faced shaft, cut
off the head of his driver from his trunk. The steeds of Duryodhana's
car, deprived of their driver, ran wildly on all sides, O Bharata,
dragging the car after them, at which loud wails arose (in the Kuru
army). Then the mighty car-warrior Ashvatthama, and Kripa and Kritavarma,
followed that car, desirous of rescuing thy son. The (Kaurava) troops (at
sight of this) became exceedingly agitated. The followers of Duryodhana
became terrified. At that time, the wielder of Gandiva, drawing his bow,
began to slay them with his arrows. Then Yudhishthira, excited with rage,
rushed against the ruler of the Madras, himself urging his steeds white
as ivory and fleet as thought. We then saw something that was wonderful
in Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, for though very mild and soft, he then
became exceedingly fierce. With eyes opened wide and body trembling in
rage, the son of Kunti cut off hostile warriors in hundreds and thousands
by means of his sharp shafts. Those amongst the soldiers against whom the
eldest Pandava proceeded, were overthrown by him, O king, like mountain
summits riven with thunder. Felling cars with steeds and drivers and
standards and throwing down car-warriors in large numbers, Yudhishthira,
without any assistance, began to sport there like a mighty wind
destroying masses of clouds. Filled with rage, he destroyed steeds with
riders and steeds without riders and foot-soldiers by thousands in that
battle, like Rudra destroying living creatures (at the time of the
universal dissolution). Having made the field empty by shooting his
shafts on all sides, Yudhishthira rushed against the ruler of the Madras
and said, "Wait, Wait!" Beholding the feats then of that hero of terrible
deeds, all thy warriors became inspired with fear. Shalya, however,
proceeded against him. Both of them filled with rage, blew their conchs.
Returning and challenging each other, each then encountered the other.
Then Shalya covered Yudhishthira with showers of arrows. Similarly, the
son of Kunti covered the ruler of the Madras with showers of arrows. Then
those two heroes, the ruler of the Madras and Yudhishthira, mangled in
that battle with each other's arrows and bathed in blood, looked like a
Salmali and a Kinsuka tree decked with flowers. Both possessed of
splendour and both invincible in battle, those two illustrious warriors
uttered loud roars. Beholding them both, the soldiers could not conclude
which of them would be victorious. Whether the son of Pritha would enjoy
the Earth, having slain Shalya, or whether Shalya having slain the son of
Pandu would bestow the Earth on Duryodhana, could not be ascertained, O
Bharata, by the warriors present there. King Yudhishthira, in course of
that battle, placed his foes to his right. Then Shalya shot a hundred
foremost of arrows at Yudhishthira. With another arrow of great
sharpness, he cut off the latter's bow. Taking up another bow,
Yudhishthira pierced Shalya with three hundred shafts and cut off the
latter's bow with a razor-faced arrow. The son of Pandu then slew the
four steeds of his antagonist with some straight arrows. With two other
very sharp shafts, he then cut off the two Parshni drivers of Shalya.
Then with another blazing, well-tempered and sharp shaft, he cut off the
standard of Shalya staying in his front. Then, O chastiser of foes, the
army of Duryodhana broke. The son of Drona, at this time, speedily
proceeded towards the ruler of the Madras who had been reduced to that
plight, and quickly taking him up on his own car, fled away quickly.
After the two had proceeded for a moment, they heard Yudhishthira roar
aloud. Stopping, the ruler of the Madras then ascended another car that
had been equipped duly. That best of cars had a rattle deep as the roar
of the clouds. Well furnished with weapons and instruments and all kinds
of utensils, that vehicle made the hair of foes stand on end.'"
