38
Janamejaya said, "Why was that tirtha called Sapta-Saraswat? Who was the
ascetic Mankanaka? How did that adorable one become crowned with success?
What were his vows and observances? In whose race was he born? What books
did that best of regenerate ones study? I desire to hear all this, O
foremost of regenerate ones!"
Vaishampayana said, "O king, the seven Sarasvatis cover this universe!
Whithersoever the Sarasvati was summoned by persons of great energy,
thither she made her appearance. These are the seven forms of the
Sarasvati: Suprava, Kanchanakshi, Visala, Manorama, Oghavati, Surenu, and
Vimalodaka. The Supreme Grandsire had at one time performed a great
sacrifice. While that sacrifice was in course of performance on the
ground selected, many regenerate ones crowned with ascetic success came
there. The spot resounded with the recitation of sacred hymns and the
chanting of the Vedas. In the matter of those sacrificial rites, the very
gods lost their coolness (so grand were the preparations). There, O
monarch, while the Grandsire was installed in the sacrifice and was
performing the grand ceremony capable of bestowing prosperity and every
wish, many notable ones conversant with righteousness and profit were
present. As soon as they thought of the articles of which they stood in
need, these, O monarch, immediately appeared before the regenerate ones
(among the guests) that came there. The Gandharvas sang and the diverse
tribes of Apsaras danced. And they played upon many celestial instruments
all the time. The wealth of provisions procured in that sacrifice
satisfied the very gods. What shall I say then of human beings? The very
celestials became filled with wonder! During the continuance of that
sacrifice at Pushkara and in the presence of the Grandsire, the Rishis, O
king, said, 'This sacrifice cannot be said to possess high attributes,
since that foremost of rivers, Sarasvati, is not to be seen here!'
Hearing these words, the divine Brahman cheerfully thought of Sarasvati.
Summoned at Pushkara by the Grandsire engaged in the performance of a
sacrifice, Sarasvati, O king, appeared there, under the name of Suprava.
Beholding Sarasvati quickly pay that regard to the Grandsire, the Munis
esteemed that sacrifice highly. Even thus that foremost of rivers, the
Sarasvati, made her appearance at Pushkara for the sake of the Grandsire
and for gratifying the Munis. (At another time), O king, many Munis,
mustering together at Naimisha, took up their residence there. Delightful
disquisition occurred among them, O king, about the Vedas. There where
those Munis, conversant with diverse scriptures, took up their abode,
there they thought of the Sarasvati. Thus thought of, O monarch, by those
Rishis performing a sacrifice, the highly blessed and sacred Sarasvati,
for rendering assistance, O king, to those high-souled Munis assembled
together, made her appearance at Naimisha and came to be called
Kanchanakshi. That foremost of rivers, worshipped by all, thus came
there, O Bharata! While (king) Gaya was engaged in the performance of a
great sacrifice at Gaya, the foremost of rivers, Sarasvati, summoned at
Gaya's sacrifice (made her appearance there). The Rishis of rigid vows
that were there, named this form of hers at Gaya as Visala. That river of
swift current flows from the sides of the Himavat. Auddalaka had also, O
Bharata, performed a sacrifice. A large concourse of Munis had been
gathered there. It was on that sacred region, the northern part of
Kosala, O king, that the sacrifice of high-souled Auddalaka was
performed. Before Auddalaka began his sacrifice, he had thought of the
Sarasvati. That foremost of rivers came to that region for the sake of
those Rishis. Worshipped by all those Munis clad in barks and deer-skins
she became known by the name of Manorama, as those Rishis mentally called
her. While, again, the high-souled Kuru was engaged in a sacrifice at
Kurukshetra, that foremost of rivers, the highly blessed Sarasvati, made
her appearance there. Summoned, O monarch, by the high-souled Vasishtha
(who assisted Kuru in his sacrifice), the Sarasvati, full of celestial
water appeared at Kurukshetra under the name of Oghavati. Daksha at one
time performed a sacrifice at the source of Ganga. The Sarasvati appeared
there under the name of the fast-flowing Surenu. Once again, while
Brahman was engaged in a sacrifice on the sacred forest of the Himavat
mountains, the adorable Sarasvati, summoned (by him), appeared there. All
these seven forms then came and joined together in that tirtha where
Baladeva came. And because the seven mingled together at that spot,
therefore is that tirtha known on Earth by the name of Sapta Sarasvati.
Thus have I told thee of the seven Sarasvatis, according to their names.
I have also told thee of the sacred tirtha called Sapta Saraswat. Listen
now to a great feat of Mankanaka, who had from his youth led the life of
a brahmacari. While employed in performing his ablutions in the river, he
beheld (one day), O Bharata, a woman of faultless limbs and fair brows,
bathing in the river at will, her person uncovered. At this sight, O
monarch, the vital seed of the Rishi fell unto the Sarasvati. The great
ascetic took it up and placed it within his earthen pot. Kept within that
vessel, the fluid became divided into seven parts. From those seven
portions were born seven Rishis from whom sprang the (nine and forty)
Maruts. The seven Rishis were named Vayuvega, Vayuhan, Vayumandala,
Vayujata, Vayuretas, and Vayuchakra of great energy. Thus were born these
progenitors of the diverse Maruts. Hear now a more wonderful thing, O
king, a fact exceedingly marvellous on Earth, about the conduct of the
great Rishi, which is well known in the three worlds. In days of yore,
after Mankanaka had become crowned with success, O king, his hand, on one
occasion, became pierced with a Kusa blade. Thereupon, a vegetable juice
came out of the wound (and not red blood). Seeing that vegetable juice,
the Rishi became filled with joy and danced about on the spot. Seeing him
dance, all mobile and immobile creatures, O hero, stupefied by his
energy, began to dance. Then the gods with Brahman at their head, and the
Rishis possessed of wealth of asceticism, O king, all went to Mahadeva
and informed him of the act of the Rishi (Mankanaka). And they said unto
him, 'It behoveth thee, O god, to do that which may prevent the Rishi
from dancing!' Then Mahadeva, seeing the Rishi filled with great joy, and
moved by the desire of doing good unto the gods, addressed him, saying,
'Why, O Brahmana, dost thou dance in this way, acquainted as thou art
with thy duties? What grave cause is there for such joy of thine, O sage,
that, an ascetic as thou art, O best of Brahmanas, and walking as thou
dost along the path of virtue, thou shouldst act in this way?'
"The Rishi said, 'Why, seest thou not, O Brahmana, that a vegetable juice
is flowing from this wound of mine? Seeing this, O lord, I am dancing in
great joy!' Laughing at the Rishi who was stupefied by passion, the god
said, 'I do not, O Brahmana, at all wonder at this! Behold me!' Having
said this unto that foremost of Rishis, Mahadeva of great intelligence
struck his thumb with the end of one of his fingers. Thereupon, O king,
ashes, white as snow, came out of that wound. Seeing this, the Rishi
became ashamed, O monarch, and fell at the feet of the god. He understood
the god to be none else than Mahadeva. Filled with wonder, he said, 'I do
not think that thou art any one else than Rudra, that great and Supreme
being! O wielder of the trident, thou art the refuge of this universe
consisting of gods and Asuras! The wise say that this universe hath been
created by thee! At the universal destruction, everything once more
enters thee! Thou art incapable of being known by the gods, how then
canst thou be known by me? All forms of being that are in the universe
are seen in thee! The gods with Brahman at their head worship thy boon
giving self, O sinless one! Thou art everything! Thou art the creator of
the gods and it was thou who hadst caused them to be created! Through thy
grace, the gods pass their time in joy and perfect fearlessness!' Having
praised Mahadeva in this manner, the Rishi bowed to him, 'Let not this
absence of gravity, ridiculous in the extreme, that I displayed, O god,
destroy my ascetic merit! I pray to thee for this!' The god, with a
cheerful heart, once more said unto him 'Let thy asceticism increase a
thousandfold, O Brahmana, through my grace! I shall also always dwell
with thee in this asylum! For the man that will worship me in the tirtha
Sapta-Saraswat there will be nothing unattainable here or hereafter.
Without doubt, such a one shall go to the region called Saraswat (in
heaven) after death!' Even this is the history of Mankanaka of abundant
energy. He was a son begotten by the god of wind upon (the lady) Sukanya."
