
SECTION CLXXVI
"Vaisampayana said, 'That bull among the Bharatas, Arjuna, hearing these
words of the Gandharva, was inspired with feelings of devotion and stood
shes (???--JBH), killing deer and wild boars. Once on a time, while out
in quest of deer, the king became weak with exertion and thirst. The
monarch arrived in that state at the asylum of Vasishtha, and the blessed
and illustrious Rishi beholding him arrive, reverenced with his homage
that best of men, king Viswamitra. And O Bharata, the Rishi saluted the
monarch by offering him water to wash his face and feet with, and Arghya,
and wild fruits, and clarified butter. For the illustrious Rishi had a
cow yielding anything that was desired of her. When she was addressed,
saying, 'O give',--she always yielded the article that was sought. And
she yielded various fruits and corn, wild or grown in gardens and fields,
and milk, and many excellent nutritive viands full of six different kinds
of juice (taste?) and like unto nectar itself, and various other kinds of
enjoyable things, O Arjuna, of ambrosial taste for drinking and eating,
and for licking and sucking, and also many precious gems and robes of
various kinds. With these desirable objects in profusion the monarch was
worshipped. And the king with his minister and troops became highly
pleased. And the monarch wondered much, beholding that cow with six
elevated limbs and the beautiful flanks and hips, and five limbs that
were broad, and eyes prominent like those of the frog and beautiful in
size, and high udders, and faultless make, and straight and uplifted
ears, and handsome horns, and well-developed head and neck.
"And, O prince, the son of Gadhi, gratified with everything and
applauding the cow named Nandini, addressed the Rishi, saying, 'O
Brahmana, O great Muni, give me thy Naridini in exchange for ten thousand
kine, or my kingdom. Enjoy thou my kingdom (giving me thy cow).'
"Hearing these words of Viswamitra, Vasishtha said, 'O sinless one, this
cow hath been kept by me for the sake of the gods, guests, and the
Pitris, as also for my sacrifices. I cannot give Nandini in exchange for
even thy kingdom.' Viswamitra replied, 'I am a Kshatriya, but thou art a
Brahmana devoted to asceticism and study. Is there any energy in
Brahmanas who are peaceful and who have their souls under perfect
command? When thou givest me not what I desire in exchange even for ten
thousand cows, I will not abandon the practice of my order; I will take
thy cow even by force!'
"Vasishtha said, 'Thou art a Kshatriya endued with might of arms. Thou
art a powerful monarch. O, do in haste what thou desirest; and stop not
to consider its propriety.'
"The Gandharva continued, 'Thus addressed by Vasishtha, Viswamitra, O
Partha, then forcibly seized Nandini, that cow (white) like the swan or
the moon, and attempted to take her away, afflicting her with stripes and
persecuting her otherwise. The innocent Nandini then began, O Partha, to
low piteously, and approaching the illustrious Vasishtha stood before him
with uplifted face. Though persecuted very cruelly, she refused to leave
the Rishi's asylum.'
"Beholding her in that plight, Vasishtha said, 'O amiable one, thou art
lowing repeatedly and I am hearing thy cries. But, O Nandini, even
Viswamitra is taking thee away by force, what can I do in this matter, as
I am a forgiving Brahmana?'
"The Gandharva continued, 'Then, O bull in Bharata's race, Nandini,
alarmed at the sight of Viswamitra's troops and terrified by Viswamitra
himself, approached the Rishi still closer, and said, 'O illustrious one,
why art thou so indifferent to my poor self afflicted with the stripes of
the cruel troops of Viswamitra and crying so piteously as if I were
masterless?' Hearing these words of the crying and persecuted Nandini,
the great Rishi lost not his patience nor turned from his vow of
forgiveness. He replied, 'The Kshatriya's might lies in physical
strength, the Brahmana's in forgiveness. Because I cannot give up
forgiveness, go thou, O Nandini, if thou choosest.' Nandini answered,
'Castest thou me away, O illustrious one, that thou sayest so? If thou
dost not cast me off, I cannot, O Brahmana, be taken away by force.'
Vasishtha said, 'O blessed one, I do not cast thee off! Stay if thou
canst! O, yonder is thy calf, tied with a stout cord, and even now being
weakened by it!'
"The Gandharva continued, 'Then the cow of Vasishtha, hearing the word
stay, raised her head and neck upward, and became terrible to behold.
With eyes red with rage and lowing repeatedly, she then attacked
Viswamitra's troops on all sides. Afflicted with their stripes and
running hither and thither with those red eyes of hers, her wrath
increased. Blazing with rage, she soon became terrible to behold like
unto the sun in his midday glory. And from her tail she began to rain
showers of burning coals all around. And some moments after, from her
tail she brought forth an army of Palhavas, and from her udders, an army
of Dravidas and Sakas; and from her womb, an army of Yavanas, and from
her dung, an army of Savaras; and from her urine, an army of Kanchis; and
from her sides, an army of Savaras. And from the froth of her mouth came
out hosts of Paundras and Kiratas, Yavanas and Sinhalas, and the
barbarous tribes of Khasas and Chivukas and Pulindas and Chinas and Hunas
with Keralas, and numerous other Mlechchhas. And that vast army of
Mlechchhas in various uniforms, and armed with various weapons, as soon
as it sprang into life, deploying in the very sight of Viswamitra,
attacked that monarch's soldiers. And so numerous was that Mlechchha host
that each particular soldier of Viswamitra was attacked by a band of six
or seven of their enemies. Assailed with a mighty shower of weapons,
Viswamitra's troops broke and fled, panic-stricken, in all directions,
before his very eyes. But, O bull in Bharata's race, the troops of
Vasishtha, though excited with wrath, took not the life of any of
Viswamitra's troops. Nandini simply caused the monarch's army to be
routed and driven off. And driven (from the asylum) twenty-seven full
miles, panic-stricken, they shrieked aloud and beheld not anyone that
could protect them. Viswamitra, beholding this wonderful feat that
resulted from Brahmana prowess, became disgusted with Kshatriya prowess
and said, 'O, fie on Kshatriya prowess! Brahmana prowess is true prowess!
In judging of strength and weakness, I see that asceticism is true
strength.' Saying this, the monarch, abandoning his large domains and
regal splendour and turning his back upon all pleasures, set his mind on
asceticism. Crowned with success in asceticism and filling the three
worlds with the heat of his ascetic penances, he afflicted all creatures
and finally became a Brahmana. The son of Kusika at last drank Soma with
Indra himself (in Heaven).'"
