47
Janamejaya said, "This history, O regenerate one, that I have heard from
thee is exceedingly wonderful, this narration, in detail, of the
installation, according to due rites, of Skanda. O thou possessed of
wealth of asceticism, I deem myself cleansed by having listened to this
account. My hair stands on end and my mind hath become cheerful. Having
heard the history of the installation of Kumara and the destruction of
the Daityas, great hath been my joy. I feel a curiosity, however, in
respect of another matter. How was the Lord of the waters installed by
the celestials in that tirtha in days of yore? O best of men, tell me
that, for thou art possessed of great wisdom and art skilled in
narration!"
Vaishampayana said, "Listen, O king, to this wonderful history of what
transpired truly in a former Kalpa! In days of yore, in the Krita age, O
king, all celestials, duly approaching Varuna, said unto him these words,
'As Shakra, the Lord of the celestials, always protects us from every
fear, similarly be thou the Lord of all the rivers! Thou always residest,
O god, in the Ocean, that home of makaras! This Ocean, the lord of
rivers, will then be under thy dominion! Thou shalt then wax and wane
with Soma!' (Thus addressed) Varuna answered them, saying, 'Let it be
so!' All the celestials then, assembling together, made Varuna having his
abode in the ocean the Lord of all the waters, according to the rites
laid down in the scriptures. Having installed Varuna as the Lord of all
aquatic creatures and worshipping him duly, the celestials returned to
their respective abodes. Installed by the celestials, the illustrious
Varuna began to duly protect seas and lakes and rivers and other
reservoirs of water as Shakra protects the gods. Bathing in that tirtha
also and giving away diverse kinds of gifts, Baladeva, the slayer of
Pralamva, possessed of great wisdom, then proceeded to Agnitirtha, that
spot where the eater of clarified butter, disappearing from the view,
became concealed within the entrails of the Sami wood. When the light of
all the worlds thus disappeared, O sinless one, the gods then repaired to
the Grandsire of the universe. And they said, 'The adorable Agni has
disappeared. We do not know the reason. Let not all creatures be
destroyed. Create fire, O puissant Lord!'"
Janamejaya said, "For what reason did Agni, the Creator of all the
worlds, disappear? How also was he discovered by the gods? Tell me all
this in detail."
Vaishampayana said, "Agni of great energy became very much frightened at
the curse of Bhrigu. Concealing himself within the entrails of the Sami
wood, that adorable god disappeared from the view. Upon the disappearance
of Agni, all the gods, with Vasava at their head, in great affliction,
searched for the missing god. Finding Agni then, they saw that god lying
within the entrails of the Sami wood. The celestials, O tiger among king,
with Brihaspati at their head, having succeeded in finding out the god,
became very glad with Vasava amongst them. They then returned to the
places they had come from. Agni also, from Bhrigu's curse, became an
eater of everything, as Bhrigu, that utterer of Brahma, had said. The
intelligent Balarama, having bathed there, then proceeded to Brahmayoni
where the adorable Grandsire of all the worlds had exercised his
functions of creations. In days of yore, the Lord Brahman, along with all
the gods, bathed in that tirtha, according to due rites for the
celestials. Bathing there and giving away diverse kinds of gifts,
Valadeva then proceeded to the tirtha called Kauvera where the puissant
Ailavila, having practised severe austerities, obtained, O king, the
Lordship over all treasures. While he dwelt there (engaged in
austerities), all kinds of wealth, and all the precious gems came to him
of their own accord. Baladeva having repaired to that tirtha and bathed
in its waters duly gave much wealth unto the Brahamanas. Rama beheld at
that spot the excellent woods of Kuvera. In days of yore, the high-souled
Kuvera, the chief of the Yakshas, having practised the severest
austerities there, obtained many boons. There were the lordship of all
treasures, the friendship of Rudra possessed of immeasurable energy, the
status of a god, the regency over a particular point of the compass (the
north), and a son named Nakakuvera. These the chief of the Yakshas
speedily obtained there, O thou of mighty arms! The Maruts, coming there,
installed him duly (in his sovereignty). He also obtained for a vehicle a
well-equipped and celestial car, fleet as thought, as also all the
affluence of a god. Bathing in that tirtha and giving away much wealth,
Vala using white unguents thence proceeded quickly to another tirtha.
Populous with all kinds of creatures, that tirtha is known by the name
Vadarapachana. There the fruits of every season are always to be found
and flowers and fruits of every kind are always abundant."
