95
"Sanjaya said, 'Upon the fall of Karna otherwise called Vaikartana, the
Kauravas, afflicted with fear, fled away on all sides, casting their eyes
on empty space. Indeed, hearing that the heroic Karna had been slain by
the foe, all thy troops, stupefied with fear, broke and fled in all
directions. Then, O king, the leaders, filled with anxiety, desirous of
withdrawing their troops, O Bharata, whose flight had been endeavoured to
be checked by thy son. Understanding their wishes, thy son, O bull of
Bharata's race, acting according to the advice of Shalya, withdrew the
army. Then Kritavarma, O Bharata, surrounded by thy unslaughtered remnant
of thy Narayana troops of thy army, quickly proceeded towards the
encampment. Surrounded by a 1,000 gandharvas, Shakuni, beholding the son
of Adhiratha slain, proceeded quickly towards the encampment.
Sharadvata's son, Kripa, O king, surrounded by the large elephant force
that resembled a mass of clouds, proceeded quickly towards the
encampment. The heroic Ashvatthama, repeatedly drawing deep breaths at
the sight of the victory of the Pandavas, proceeded quickly towards the
encampment. Surrounded by the unslaughtered remnant of the samsaptakas
which was still a large force, Susharma also, O king, proceeded, casting
his eyes on those terrified soldiers. King Duryodhana, deeply afflicted
and deprived of everything, proceeded, his heart filled with grief, and a
prey to many cheerless thoughts. Shalya, that foremost of car-warriors,
proceeded towards the camp, on that car deprived of standard, casting his
eyes on all sides. The other mighty car-warriors of the Bharata army,
still numerous, fled quickly, afflicted with fear, filled with shame, and
almost deprived of their senses. Indeed seeing Karna overthrown, all the
Kauravas fled away quickly, afflicted and anxious with fear, trembling,
and with voices choked with tears. The mighty car-warriors of thy army
fled away in fear, O chief of Kuru's race, some applauding Arjuna, some
applauding Karna. Amongst those thousands of warriors of thy army in that
great battle, there was not a single person who had still any wish for
fight. Upon the fall of Karna, O monarch, the Kauravas became hopeless of
life, kingdom, wives, and wealth. Guiding them with care, O lord, thy
son, filled with grief and sorrow, set his heart upon resting them for
the night. Those great car-warriors also, O monarch, accepting his orders
with bent heads, retired from the field with cheerless hearts and pale
faces.'"
