37
Vaishampayana said, "Then Valadeva, O king, proceeded to Vinasana where
the Sarasvati hath become invisible in consequence of her contempt for
Sudras and Abhiras. And since the Sarasvati, in consequence of such
contempt, is lost at that spot, the Rishis, for that reason, O chief of
the Bharatas, always name the place as Vinasana. Having bathed in that
tirtha of the Sarasvati, the mighty Baladeva then proceeded to Subhumika,
situated on the excellent bank of the same river. There many
fair-complexioned Apsaras, of beautiful faces, are always engaged in
sports of a pure character without any intermission. The gods and the
Gandharvas, every month, O ruler of men, repair to that sacred tirtha
which is the resort of Brahman himself. The Gandharvas and diverse tribes
of Apsaras are to be seen there, O king, assembled together and passing
the time as happily as they like. There the gods and the Pitris sport in
joy, with sacred and auspicious flowers repeatedly rained over them, and
all the creepers also were adorned with flowery loads. And because, O
king, that spot is the beautiful sporting ground of those Apsaras,
therefore is that tirtha on the excellent bank of the Sarasvati called
Subhumika. Baladeva of Madhu's race, having bathed in that tirtha and
given away much wealth unto the Brahmanas, heard the sound of those
celestial songs and musical instruments. He also saw there many shadows
of gods, Gandharvas, and Rakshasas. The son of Rohini then proceeded to
the tirtha of the Gandharvas. There many Gandharvas headed by Viswavasu
and possessed of ascetic merit, pass their time in dance and song of the
most charming kind. Giving away diverse kinds of wealth unto the
Brahmanas, as also goats and sheep and kine and mules and camels and gold
and silver, and feeding many Brahmanas and gratifying them with many
costly gifts that were desired by them. Baladeva of Madhu's race
proceeded thence, accompanied by many Brahmanas and eulogised by them.
Leaving that tirtha resorted to by Gandharvas, that mighty-armed
chastiser of foes, having but one earring, then proceeded to the famous
tirtha called Gargasrota. There, in that sacred tirtha of the Sarasvati,
the illustrious Garga of venerable years and soul cleansed by ascetic
penances, O Janamejaya, had acquired a knowledge of Time and its course,
of the deviations of luminous bodies (in the firmament), and of all
auspicious and inauspicious portents. That tirtha, for this reason, came
to be called after his name as Gargasrota. There, O king, highly blessed
Rishis of excellent vows always waited upon Garga, O lord, for obtaining
a knowledge of Time. Smeared with white sandal-paste, O king, Baladeva,
repairing to that tirtha, duly gave away wealth unto many ascetics of
cleansed souls. Having given also many kinds of costly viands unto the
Brahmanas, that illustrious one attired in blue robes then proceeded to
the tirtha called Sankha. There, on the bank of the Sarasvati, that
mighty hero having the palmyra on his banner beheld a gigantic tree,
called Mohasankha, tall as Meru, looking like the White-mountain, and
resorted to by Rishis. There dwell Yakshas, and Vidyadharas, and
Rakshasas of immeasurable energy and Pisachas of immeasurable might, and
Siddhas, numbering thousands. All of them, abandoning other kinds of
food, observe vows and regulations, and take at due seasons the fruits of
that lord of the forest for their sustenance and wander in separate
bands, unseen by men, O foremost of human beings! That monarch of the
forest, O king, is known for this throughout the world! That tree is the
cause of this celebrated and sacred tirtha on the Sarasvati. Having given
away in that tirtha many milch cows, and vessels of copper and iron, and
diverse kinds of other vessels, that tiger of Yadu's race, Baladeva,
having the plough for his weapon, worshipped the Brahmanas and was
worshipped by them in return. He then, O king, proceeded to the Dwaita
lake. Arrived there, Vala saw diverse kinds of ascetics in diverse kinds
of attire. Bathing in its waters, he worshipped the Brahmanas. Having
given away unto the Brahmanas diverse articles of enjoyment in profusion,
Baladeva then, O king, proceeded along the southern bank of the
Sarasvati. The mighty-armed and illustrious Rama of virtuous soul and
unfading glory then proceeded to the tirtha called Nagadhanwana. Swarming
with numerous snakes, O monarch, it was the abode of Vasuki of great
splendour, the king of the snakes. There 14,000 Rishis also had their
permanent home. The celestials, having come there (in days of yore), had
according to due rites, installed the excellent snake Vasuki as king of
all the snakes. There is no fear of snakes in that place, O thou of
Kuru's race! Duly giving away many valuables there unto the Brahmanas,
Baladeva then set out with face towards the east and reached, one after
another, hundreds and thousands of famous tirthas that occurred at every
step. Bathing in all those tirthas, and observing fasts and other vows as
directed by the Rishis, and giving away wealth in profusion, and saluting
all the ascetics who had taken up their residence there, Baladeva once
more set out, along the way that those ascetics pointed out to him, for
reaching that spot where the Sarasvati turns in an eastward direction,
like torrents of rain bent by the action of the wind. The river took that
course for beholding the high-souled Rishis dwelling in the forest of
Naimisha. Always smeared with white sandalpaste, Vala, having the plough
for his weapon, beholding that foremost of rivers change her course,
became, O king, filled with wonder."
Janamejaya said, "Why, O Brahmana, did the Sarasvati bend her course
there in an easternly direction? O best of Adharyus, it behoveth thee to
tell me everything relating to this! For what reason was that daughter of
the Yadus filled with wonder? Why, indeed, did that foremost of rivers
thus alter her course?"
Vaishampayana said, "Formerly, in the Krita age, O king, the ascetics
dwelling in Naimisha were engaged in a grand sacrifice extending for
twelve years. Many were the Rishis, O king, that came to that sacrifice.
Passing their days, according to due rites, in the performance of that
sacrifice, those highly blessed ones, after the completion of that twelve
years' sacrifice at Naimisha, set out in large number for visiting the
tirthas. In consequence of the number of the Rishis, O king, the tirthas
on the southern banks of the Sarasvati all looked like towns and cities.
Those foremost of Brahmanas, O tiger among men, in consequence of their
eagerness for enjoying the merits of tirthas, took up their abodes on the
bank of the river up to the site of Samantapanchaka. The whole region
seemed to resound with the loud Vedic recitations of those Rishis of
cleansed souls, all employed in pouring libations on sacrificial fires.
That foremost of rivers looked exceedingly beautiful with those blazing
homa fires all around, over which those high-souled ascetics poured
libations of clarified butter. Valkhilyas and Asmakuttas,
Dantolakhalinas, Samprakshanas and other ascetics, as also those that
subsisted on air, and those that lived on water, and those that lived on
dry leaves of trees, and diverse others that were observant of diverse
kinds of vows, and those that forswore beds for the bare and hard earth,
all came to that spot in the vicinity of the Sarasvati. And they made
that foremost of rivers exceedingly beautiful, like the celestials
beautifying (with their presence) the heavenly stream called Mandakini.
Hundreds upon hundreds of Rishis, all given to the observance of
sacrifices, came thither. Those practisers of high vows, however, failed
to find sufficient room on the banks of the Sarasvati. Measuring small
plots of land with their sacred threads, they performed their Agnihotras
and diverse other rites. The river Sarasvati beheld, O monarch, that
large body of Rishis penetrated with despair and plunged into anxiety for
want of a broad tirtha wherein to perform their rites. For their sake,
that foremost of streams came there, having made many abodes for herself
in that spot, through kindness for those Rishis of sacred penances, O
Janamejaya! Having thus, O monarch, turned her course for their sake, the
Sarasvati, that foremost of rivers, once more flowed in a westerly
direction, as if she said, 'I must go hence, having prevented the arrival
of these Rishis from becoming futile!' This wonderful feat, O king, was
accomplished there by that great river. Even thus those receptacles of
water, O king, were formed in Naimisha. There, at Kurukshetra, O foremost
of Kuru's care, do thou perform grand sacrifices and rites! As he beheld
those many receptacles of water and seeing that foremost of rivers turn
her course, wonder filled the heart of the high-souled Rama. Bathing in
those tirthas duly and giving away wealth and diverse articles of
enjoyment unto the Brahmanas, that delighter of Yadu's race also gave
away diverse kinds of food and diverse desirable articles unto them.
Worshipped by those regenerate ones, Vala, O king, then set out from that
foremost of all tirthas on the Sarasvati (Sapta-Saraswat). Numerous
feathery creatures have their home there. And it abounded with Vadari,
Inguda, Ksamarya, Plaksha, Aswattha, Vibhitaka, Kakkola, Palasa, Karira,
Pilu, and diverse other kinds of trees that grow on the banks of the
Sarasvati. And it was adorned with forest of Karushakas, Vilwas, and
Amratakas, and Atimuktas and Kashandas and Parijatas. Agreeable to the
sight and most charming, it abounded with forests of plantains. And it
was resorted to by diverse tribes of ascetics, some living on air, some
on water, some on fruit, some on leaves, some on raw grain which they
husked with the aid only of stones, and some that were called Vaneyas.
And it resounded with the chanting of the Vedas, and teemed with diverse
kinds of animals. And it was the favourite abode of men without malice
and devoted to righteousness. Valadeva, having the plough for his weapon,
arrived at that tirtha called Sapta-Saraswat, where the great ascetic
Mankanaka had performed his penances and became crowned with success."
