12
"Sanjaya said, 'Seeing his driver fallen, Shalya, O king, quickly took up
his mace made wholly of iron and stood immovable as a bull. Bhima,
however, armed with his mighty mace, rushed impetuously towards Shalya
who then looked like the blazing Yuga-fire, or the Destroyer armed with
the noose, or the Kailasa mountain with its formidable crest, or Vasava
with his thunder, or Mahadeva with his trident, or an infuriate elephant
in the forest. At that time the blare of thousands of conchs and trumpets
and loud leonine roars arose there, enhancing the delight of heroes. The
combatants of both armies, looking at those two foremost of warriors from
every side, applauded them both, saying, "Excellent, Excellent! Save the
ruler of the Madras, or Rama, that delighter of the Yadus, there is none
else that can venture to endure the impetuosity of Bhima in battle.
Similarly, save Bhima, there is no other warrior that can venture to
endure the force of the mace of the illustrious king of the Madras in
battle." Those two combatants then, Vrikodara and the ruler of the
Madras, roaring like bulls, careered in circles, frequently jumping up in
the air. In that encounter between those two lions among men, no
difference could be noticed between them either in respect of their
careering in circles or of their wielding the mace. The mace of Shalya,
wrapped round with a resplendent cloth of gold that looked like a sheet
of fire, inspired the spectators with dread. Similarly, the mace of the
high-souled Bhima, as the latter careered in circles, looked like
lightning in the midst of the clouds. Struck by the ruler of the Madras
with his mace, the mace of Bhima, O king, produced sparks of fire in the
welkin which thereupon seemed to be ablaze. Similarly, struck by Bhima
with his mace, the mace of Shalya produced a shower of blazing coals
which seemed exceedingly wonderful. Like two gigantic elephants striking
each other with their tusks, or two huge bulls striking each other with
their horns, those two heroes began to strike each other with their
foremost of maces, like a couple of combatants striking each other with
iron bound clubs. Their limbs being struck with each other's mace, they
soon became bathed in blood and looked handsomer in consequence like two
flowering Kinsukas. Struck by the ruler of the Madras on both his left
and right, the mighty-armed Bhimasena stood immovable like a mountain.
Similarly, though struck repeatedly with the force of Bhima's mace,
Shalya, O king, moved not, like a mountain assailed by an elephant with
his tusks. The noise made by the blows of the maces of those two lions
among men was heard on all sides like successive peals of thunder. Having
ceased for a moment, those two warriors of great energy once more began,
with uplifted maces, to career in closer circles. Once more the clash
took place between those two warriors of superhuman feats, each having
advanced towards the other by eight steps, and each assailing the other
with his uplifted iron club. Then, wishing to get at each other, they
once more careered in circles. Both accomplished (in the use of the mace)
they began to display their superiority of skill. Uplifting their
terrible weapons, they then again struck each other like mountains
striking each other with their crests at the time of an earthquake.
Exceedingly crushed with each other's mace in consequence of each other's
strength, both those heroes fell down at the same time like a couple of
poles set up for Indra's worship. The brave combatants then of both
armies, at that sight, uttered cries of "Oh!" and "Alas!" Struck with
great force in their vital limbs, both of them had become exceedingly
agitated. Then the mighty Kripa, taking up Shalya, that bull among the
Madras, on his own car, quickly bore him away from the field of battle.
Within, however, the twinkling of an eye, Bhimasena, rising up, and still
reeling as if drunk, challenged, with uplifted mace, the ruler of the
Madras. Then the heroic warriors of thy army, armed with diverse weapons,
fought with the Pandavas, causing diverse musical instruments to be blown
and beat. With uplifted arms and weapons and making a loud noise, O
monarch, thy warriors headed by Duryodhana rushed against the Pandavas.
Beholding the Kaurava host, the sons of Pandu, with leonine roars, rushed
against those warriors headed by Duryodhana. Then thy son, O bull of
Bharata's race, singling out Chekitana amongst those rushing heroes,
pierced him deeply with a lance in the chest. Thus assailed by thy son,
Chekitana fell down on the terrace of his car, covered with blood, and
overcome with a deep swoon. Beholding Chekitana slain, the great
car-warriors among the Pandavas incessantly poured their arrowy showers
(upon the Kauravas). Indeed, the Pandavas, inspired with desire of
victory, O monarch, careered beautifully on all sides amongst thy
divisions. Kripa, and Kritavarma, and the mighty son of Subala, placing
the ruler of the Madras before them, fought with king Yudhishthira the
just. Duryodhana, O monarch, fought with Dhrishtadyumna, the slayer of
Bharadwaja's son, that hero endued with abundant energy and prowess.
3,000 cars, O king, despatched by thy son and headed by Drona's son,
battled with Vijaya (Arjuna). All those combatants, O king, had firmly
resolved to win victory and had cast off fear with life itself. Indeed, O
king, thy warriors penetrated into the midst of the Pandava army like
swans into a large lake. A fierce battle then took place between the
Kurus and the Pandavas, the combatants being actuated with the desire of
slaughtering one another and deriving great pleasure from giving and
receiving blows. During the progress, O king, of that battle which was
destructive of great heroes, an earthly dust, terrible to behold, was
raised by the wind. From only the names we heard (of the Pandava
warriors) that were uttered in course of that battle and from those (of
the Kuru warriors) that were uttered by the Pandavas, we knew the
combatants that fought with one another fearlessly. That dust, however, O
tiger among men, was soon dispelled by the blood that was shed, and all
the points of the compass became once more clear when that dusty darkness
was driven away. Indeed, during the progress of that terrible and awful
battle, no one among either thy warriors or those of the foe, turned his
back. Desirous of attaining to the regions of Brahman and longing for
victory by fair fight, the combatants displayed their prowess, inspired
with the hope of heaven. For paying off the debt they owed to their
masters on account of the sustenance granted by the latter, or firmly
resolved to accomplish the objects of their friends and allies, the
warriors, with hearts fixed on heaven, fought with one another on that
occasion. Shooting and hurling weapons of diverse kinds, great
car-warriors roared at or smote one another. "Slay, pierce, seize,
strike, cut off!" These were the words that were heard in that battle,
uttered by the warriors and those of the foe. Then Shalya, O monarch,
desirous of slaying him, pierced king Yudhishthira the just, that mighty
car-warrior with many sharp arrows. Conversant with what are the vital
limbs of the body, the son of Pritha, however, O monarch, with the
greatest ease, struck the ruler of the Madras with four and ten
cloth-yard shafts, aiming at the latter's vital limbs. Resisting the son
of Pandu with his shafts, Shalya of great fame, filled with rage and
desirous of slaying his adversary, pierced him in that battle with
innumerable arrows equipped with Kanka feathers. Once more, O monarch, he
struck Yudhishthira with a straight shaft in the very sight of all the
troops. King Yudhishthira the just, possessed of great fame and filled
with rage, pierced the ruler of the Madras with many keen arrows equipped
with feathers of Kankas and peacocks. The mighty car-warrior then pierced
Candrasena with seventy arrows and Shalya's driver with nine, and
Drumasena with four and sixty. When the two protectors of his car-wheels
were (thus) slain by the high-souled son of Pandu, Shalya, O king, slew
five and twenty warriors among the Cedis. And he pierced Satyaki with
five and twenty keen arrows, and Bhimasena with seven, and the two sons
of Madri with a hundred, in that battle. While Shalya was thus careering
in that battle, that best of kings, the son of Pritha, sped at him many
shafts that resembled snakes of virulent poison. With a broad-headed
arrow, Yudhishthira the son of Kunti then cut off from his car the
standard top of his adversary as the latter stood in his front. We saw
the standard of Shalya, which was thus cut off by the son of Pandu in
that great battle, fall down like a riven mountain summit. Seeing his
standard fallen and observing the son of Pandu standing before him, the
ruler of the Madras became filled with rage and shot showers of shafts.
That bull amongst Kshatriyas, Shalya of immeasurable soul, poured over
the Kshatriyas in that battle dense showers of arrows like the deity of
the clouds pouring torrents of rain. Piercing Satyaki and Bhimasena and
the twin sons of Madri by Pandu, each with five arrows, he afflicted
Yudhishthira greatly. We then, O monarch, beheld a net of arrows spread
before the chest of Pandu's son like a mass of risen clouds. The mighty
car-warrior Shalya, in that battle, filled with rage, shrouded
Yudhishthira with straight shafts. At this, king Yudhishthira afflicted
with those showers of shafts, felt himself deprived of his prowess, even
as the Asura Jambha had become before the slayer of Vritra.'"
