14
"Sanjaya said, 'Meanwhile Arjuna, in that battle, pierced with many
arrows by the son of Drona as also by the latter's followers, the heroic
and mighty car-warriors among the Trigartas, pierced Drona's son in
return with three shafts, and each of the other warriors with two. Once
again, the mighty-armed Dhananjaya covered his enemies with showers of
shafts. Though struck with keen arrows and though they looked like
porcupines in consequence of those arrows sticking to their limbs, still
thy troops, O bull of Bharata's race, fled not from Partha in that
battle. With Drona's son at their head, they encompassed that mighty
car-warrior and fought with him, shooting showers of shafts. The
gold-decked arrows, O king, shot by them, speedily filled the terrace of
Arjuna's car. Beholding those two great bowmen, those two foremost of all
warriors, the two Krishnas, covered with arrows, those invincible
(Kaurava) combatants became filled with delight. Indeed, at that time,
the Kuvara, the wheels, the shaft, the traces, the yoke, and the
Anukarsha, O lord, of Arjuna's car, became entirely enveloped with
arrows. The like of what thy warriors then did unto Partha had never
before, O king, been either seen or heard. That car looked resplendent
with those keen arrows of beautiful wings like a celestial vehicle
blazing with hundreds of torches dropped on the Earth. Then Arjuna, O
monarch, covered that hostile division with showers of straight shafts
like a cloud pouring torrents of rain on a mountain. Struck in that
battle with arrows inscribed with Partha's name, those warriors,
beholding that state of things, regarded the field of battle to be full
of Parthas. Then the Partha-fire, having for its wonderful flames and the
loud twang of Gandiva for the wind that fanned it, began to consume the
fuel constituted by thy troops. Then, O Bharata, heaps of fallen wheels
and yokes, of quivers, of banners and standards, with the vehicles
themselves that bore them, of shafts and Anukarshas and Trivenus, of
axles and traces and goads, of heads of warriors decked with earrings and
headgears, of arms, O monarch, and thighs in thousands of umbrellas along
with fans, and of diadems and crowns, were seen along the tracks of
Partha's car. Indeed, along the track of the angry Partha's car, O
monarch, the ground, miry with blood, became impassable, O chief of the
Bharatas, like the sporting ground of Rudra. The scene inspired the timid
with fear and the brave with delight. Having destroyed 2,000 cars with
their fences, that scorcher of foes, Partha, looked like a smokeless fire
with blazing flames. Indeed, even as the illustrious Agni when he blazes
forth (at the end of the Yuga) for destroying the mobile and the immobile
universe, even so looked, O king, the mighty car-warrior Partha.
Beholding the prowess of Pandu's son in that battle, the son of Drona, on
his car equipped with many banners, endeavoured to check him. Those two
tigers among men, both having white steeds yoked unto their vehicles and
both regarded as the foremost of car-warriors, quickly encountered each
other, each desirous of slaying the other. The arrowy showers shot by
both became exceedingly terrible and were as dense, O bull of Bharata's
race, as the torrents of rain poured by two masses of clouds at the close
of summer. Each challenging the other, those two warriors mangled each
other with straight shafts in that battle, like a couple of bulls tearing
each other with their horns. The battle between them, O king, was fought
equally for a long while. The clash of weapons became terrific. The son
of Drona then, O Bharata, pierced Arjuna with a dozen gold-winged arrows
of great energy and Vasudeva with ten. Having shown for a short while
some regard for the preceptor's son in that great battle, Vibhatsu then,
smiling the while, stretched his bow Gandiva with force. Soon, however,
the mighty car-warrior Savyasaci (Arjuna) made his adversary steedless
and driverless and carless, and without putting forth much strength
pierced him with three arrows. Staying on that steedless car, Drona's
son, smiling the while, hurled at the son of Pandu a heavy mallet that
looked like a dreadful mace with iron-spikes. Beholding that weapon,
which was decked with cloth of gold, coursing towards him, the heroic
Partha, that slayer of foes, cut it off into seven fragments. Seeing his
mallet cut off, Drona's son of great wrath took up a terrible mace
equipped with iron spikes and looking like a mountain summit.
Accomplished in battle, the son of Drona hurled it then at Partha.
Beholding that spiked mace coursing towards him like the Destroyer
himself in rage, Pandu's son Arjuna quickly cut it off with five
excellent shafts. Cut off with Partha's shafts in that great battle, that
weapon fell down on the Earth, riving the hearts, as it were, O Bharata,
of the (hostile) kings. The son of Pandu then pierced Drona's son with
three other shafts. Though deeply pierced by the mighty Partha, Drona's
son, however, of great might, relying upon his own manliness, showed no
sign of fear or agitation. That great car-warrior, the son of Drona,
then, O king, shrouded Suratha (the Pancala) with showers of shafts
before the eyes of all the Kshatriyas. At this, Suratha, that great
car-warrior among the Pancalas, in that battle, riding upon his car whose
rattle was as deep as the roar of the clouds rushed against the son of
Drona. Drawing his foremost of bows, firm and capable of bearing a great
strain, the Pancala hero covered Ashvatthama with arrows that resembled
flames of fire or snakes of virulent poison. Seeing the great car-warrior
Suratha rushing towards him in wrath, the son of Drona became filled with
rage like a snake struck with a stick. Furrowing his brow into three
lines, and licking the corners of his mouth with his tongue, he looked at
Suratha in rage and then rubbed his bow-string and sped a keen cloth-yard
shaft that resembled the fatal rod of Death. Endued with great speed,
that shaft pierced the heart of Suratha and passing out entered the
Earth, riving her through, like the thunderbolt of Shakra hurled from the
sky. Struck with that shaft, Suratha fell down on the Earth like a
mountain summit riven with thunder. After the fall of that hero, the
valiant son of Drona, that foremost of car-warriors speedily mounted upon
the vehicle of his slain foe. Then, O monarch, that warrior, invincible
in battle, the son of Drona, well-equipped with armour and weapons, and
supported by the Samsaptakas, fought with Arjuna. That battle, at the
hour of noon, between one and the many, enhancing the population of
Yama's domains, became exceedingly fierce. Wonderful was the sight that
we then beheld, for, noticing the prowess of all those combatants,
Arjuna, alone and unsupported, fought with his foes at the same time. The
encounter was exceedingly fierce that thus took place between Arjuna and
his enemies, resembling that between Indra, in days of yore, and the vast
host of the Asuras.'"
