70
"Sanjaya said, 'Thus addressed by Janardana, Pritha's son Arjuna,
applauding those counsels of his friend, then vehemently addressed king
Yudhishthira the just, in language that was harsh and the like of which
he had never used before.
"'Arjuna said, "Do thou not, O king, address these upbraidings to me,
thou that art passing thy time full two miles away from battle. Bhima,
however, who is battling with the foremost heroes of the world may
upbraid me. Having afflicted his foes at the proper time in battle, and
slain many brave lords of earth and many foremost of car-warriors and
huge elephants and many heroic horsemen and countless brave combatants,
he hath, in addition, slain a 1,000 elephants and 10,000 Kamboja
mountaineers, and is uttering loud roars in battle like a lion after
slaying innumerable smaller animals. That hero achieveth the most
difficult feats, the like of which thou canst never achieve. Jumping down
from his car, mace in hand, he hath destroyed a large number of steeds
and cars and elephants in battle. With also his foremost of swords he
hath destroyed many horsemen and cars and steeds and elephants. With the
broken limbs of cars, and with his bow also, he consumeth his foes.
Endued with the prowess of Indra, with his feet and also his bare arms he
slayeth numerous foes. Possessed of great might and resembling Kuvera and
Yama, he destroyeth the hostile army, putting forth his strength. That
Bhimasena hath the right to upbraid me, but not thou that art always
protected by friends. Agitating the foremost of car-warriors and
elephants and steeds and foot-soldiers, Bhima, single-handed, is now in
the midst of the Dhartarashtras. That chastiser of foes hath the right to
upbraid me. The chastiser of foes who is slaying the Kalingas, the
Vangas, the Angas, the Nishadas, and the Magadhas, and large numbers of
hostile elephants that are ever infuriated and that look like masses of
blue clouds, is competent to upbraid me. Riding on a suitable car,
shaking his bow at the proper time, and with shafts in his (other) hand,
that hero poureth showers of arrows in great battle like the clouds
pouring torrents of rain. Eight hundred elephants, I have seen, with
their frontal globes split open and the ends of their tusks cut off, have
today been slain by Bhima with shafts in battle. That slayer of foes is
competent to tell me harsh words. The learned say that the strength of
the foremost of Brahmanas lies in speech, and that the Kshatriya's
strength is in his arms. Thou, O Bharata, art strong in words and very
unfeeling. Thou thinkest me to be like thyself. I always strive to do
thee good with my soul, life, sons and wives. Since, not withstanding all
this, thou still piercest me with such wordy darts, it is evident that we
cannot expect any happiness from thee. Lying on Draupadi's bed thou
insultest me, though for thy sake I slay the mightiest of car-warriors.
Thou art without any anxiety, O Bharata, and thou art cruel. I have never
obtained any happiness from thee. It was for thy good, O chief of men,
that Bhishma, firmly devoted to truth, himself told thee the means of his
death in battle, and was slain by the heroic and high-souled Shikhandi,
the son of Drupada, protected by me. I do not derive any pleasure from
the thought of thy restoration to sovereignty, since thou art addicted to
the evil practice of gambling. Having thyself committed a wicked act to
which they only are addicted that are low, thou desirest now to vanquish
thy foes through our aid. Thou hadst heard of the numerous faults and the
great sinfulness of dice that Sahadeva spoke about. Yet dice, which are
worshipped by the wicked, thou couldst not abandon. It was for this that
all of us have fallen into hell. We have never derived any happiness from
thee since thou wert engaged in gambling with dice. Having, O son of
Pandu, thyself caused all this calamity, thou art, again, addressing
these harsh words to me. Slain by us, hostile troops are lying on the
field, with mangled bodies and uttering loud wails. It was thou that
didst that cruel act in consequence of which the Kauravas have become
offenders and are being destroyed. Nations from the North, the West, the
East, and the South, are being struck, wounded and slain, after the
performance of incomparable feats in battle by great warriors of both
sides. It was thou that hadst gambled. It was for thee that we lost our
kingdom. Our calamity arose from thee, O king! Striking us, again, with
the cruel goad of thy speeches, O king, do not provoke our wrath.'"
"Sanjaya said, 'Having addressed these harsh and exceedingly bitter words
unto his eldest brother and thereby committed a venial sin, the
intelligent Savyasaci of calm wisdom, who is ever actuated by the fear of
defection from virtue, became very cheerless. The son of the chief of the
celestials became filled with remorse and breathing heavily, drew his
sword. Seeing this, Krishna asked him, "What is this? Why dost thou again
unsheathe thy sword blue as the sky? Tell me what thy answer is, for then
I shall give thee counsel for the gratification of thy object." Thus
addressed by that foremost of men, Arjuna, in great sorrow answered
Keshava, saying, "I shall, putting forth my strength, slay my own self by
whom this wicked act hath been done." Hearing those words of Partha,
Keshava, that foremost of all righteous persons said this unto
Dhananjaya, "Having said these words unto the king, why hast thou become
so cheerless? O slayer of foes, thou desirest now to destroy thy own
self. This, however, Kiritin, is not approved by the righteous. If, O
hero among men, thou hadst today, from fear of sin, slain this thy eldest
brother of virtuous soul, what would then have been thy condition and
what wouldst thou not then have done? Morality is subtle, O Bharata, and
unknowable, especially by those that are ignorant. Listen to me as I
preach to thee. By destroying thy own self, thou wouldst sink into a more
terrible hell than if thou hadst slain thy brother. Declare now, in
words, thy own merit. Thou shalt then, O Partha, have slain thy own
self." Applauding these words and saying, "Let it be so, O Krishna,"
Dhananjaya, the son of Sakra, lowering his bow, said unto Yudhishthira,
that foremost of virtuous persons, "Listen, O king, there is no other
bowman, O ruler of men, like unto myself, except the deity that bears
Pinaka; I am regarded by even that illustrious deity. In a moment I can
destroy this universe of mobile and immobile creatures. It was I, O king,
that vanquished all the points of the compass with all the kings ruling
there, and brought all to thy subjection. The Rajasuya (performed by
thee), brought to completion by gift of Dakshina, and the celestial
palace owned by thee, were both due to my prowess. In my hands are (marks
of) sharp shafts and a stringed bow with arrow fixed thereon. On both my
soles are the signs of cars with standards. No one can vanquish a person
like me in battle. Nations from the North, the West, the East and the
South, have been struck down, slain, exterminated and destroyed. A small
remnant only of the samsaptakas is alive. I alone have slain half of the
entire (hostile) army. Slaughtered by me, the Bharata host that
resembled, O king, the very host of the celestials, is lying dead on the
field. I slay those with (high) weapons that are conversant with high
weapons. For this reason I do not reduce the three worlds to ashes.
Riding upon my terrible and victorious car, Krishna and myself will soon
proceed for slaying the Suta's son. Let this king become cheerful now. I
will surely slay Karna in battle, with my arrows. Either the Suta dame
will today be made childless by me, or Kunti will be made childless by
Karna. Truly do I say it that I will not put off my armour before I have
slain Karna with my arrows in battle.'"
"Sanjaya said, 'Having said these words unto that foremost of virtuous
persons, viz., Yudhishthira, Partha threw down his weapons and cast aside
his bow and quickly thrust his sword back into its sheath. Hanging down
his head in shame, the diadem-decked Arjuna, with joined hands, addressed
Yudhishthira, and said, "Be cheerful, O king, forgiving me. What I have
said, you will understand a little while after. I bow to thee." Thus
seeking to cheer that royal hero capable of bearing all foes, Arjuna,
that foremost of men, standing there, once more said, "This task will not
be delayed. It will be accomplished soon. Karna cometh towards me. I
shall proceed against him. I shall, with my whole soul, proceed for
rescuing Bhima from the battle and for slaying the Suta's son. I tell
thee that I hold my life for thy good. Know this for the truth, O king."
Having said so, the diadem-decked Arjuna of blazing splendour touched the
king's feet and rose for proceeding to the field. Hearing, however, those
harsh words of his brother Phalguna, Pandu's son, king Yudhishthira, the
just, rising up from that bed (on which he had been sitting), said these
words unto Partha, with his heart filled with sorrow, "O Partha, I have
acted wickedly. For that, ye have been overwhelmed with terrible
calamity. Do thou strike off, therefore, this my head today. I am the
worst of men, and the exterminator of my race. I am a wretch. I am
addicted to wicked courses. I am of foolish understanding. I am idle and
a coward. I am an insulter of the old. I am cruel. What wouldst thou gain
by always being obedient to a cruel person like me? A wretch that I am, I
shall this very day retire into the woods. Live you happily without me.
The high-souled Bhimasena is fit to be king. A eunuch that I am, what
shall I do with sovereignty? I am incapable of bearing these harsh
speeches of thee excited with wrath. Let Bhima become king. Having been
insulted thus, O hero, what use have I with life." Having said these
words, the king, leaving that bed, suddenly stood up and desired to go to
the woods. Then Vasudeva, bowing down, said unto him, "O king, the
celebrated vow of the wielder of Gandiva who is ever devoted to truth
about his Gandiva, is known to thee. That man in the world who would tell
him, 'Give thy Gandiva to another', would be slain by him. Even those
very words were addressed to him by you. Therefore, for keeping that
earnest vow, Partha, acting also at my instance, inflicted you this
insult, O lord of Earth. Insult to superiors is said to be their death.
For this reason, O thou of mighty arms, it behoveth thee to forgive me
that beseech and bow to thee this transgression, O king, of both myself
and Arjuna, committed for maintaining the truth. Both of us, O great
king, throw ourselves on thy mercy. The Earth shall today drink the blood
of the wretched son of Radha. I swear truly to thee. Know the Suta's son
as slain today. He, whose slaughter thou desirest, hath today lost his
life." Hearing those words of Krishna, king Yudhishthira the just, in a
great fury, raised the prostrate Hrishikesha and joining his hands, said
in haste, "It is even so as thou hast said. I have been guilty of a
transgression, I have now been awakened by thee, O Govinda. I am saved by
thee, O Madhava. By thee, O Acyuta, we have today been rescued from a
great calamity. Both of us stupefied by folly, viz., myself and Arjuna,
have been rescued from an ocean of distress, having obtained thee as our
lord. Indeed, having obtained the raft of thy intelligence today, we
have, with our relatives and allies, passed over an ocean of sorrow and
grief. Having obtained thee, O Acyuta, we are not masterless."'"
