54
Vaishampayana said, "Having visited Kurukshetra and given away wealth
there, he of the Satwata race then proceeded, O Janamejaya, to a large
and exceedingly beautiful hermitage. That hermitage was overgrown with
Madhuka and mango trees, and abounded with Plakshas and Nyagrodhas. And
it contained many Vilwas and many excellent jack and Arjuna trees.
Beholding that goodly asylum with many marks of sacredness, Baladeva
asked the Rishis as to whose it was. Those high-souled ones, O king, said
unto Baladeva, 'Listen in detail, O Rama, as to whose asylum this was in
days of yore! Here the god Vishnu in days of yore performed austere
penances. Here he performed duly all the eternal sacrifices. Here a
Brahmani maiden, leading from youth the vow of Brahmacharya, became
crowned with ascetic success. Ultimately, in the possession of Yoga
powers, that lady of ascetic penances proceeded to heaven. The
high-souled Sandilya, O king, got a beautiful daughter who was chaste,
wedded to severe vows, self-restrained, and observant of Brahmacharya.
Having performed the severest of penances such as are incapable of being
performed by women, the blessed lady at last went to heaven, worshipped
by the gods and Brahmanas!' Having heard these words of the Rishis,
Baladeva entered that asylum. Bidding farewell to the Rishis, Baladeva of
unfading glory went through the performance of all the rites and
ceremonies of the evening twilight on the side of Himavat and then began
his ascent of the mountain. The mighty Balarama having the device of the
palmyra on his banner had not proceeded far in his ascent when he beheld
a sacred and goodly tirtha and wondered at the sight. Beholding the glory
of the Sarasvati, as also the tirtha called Plakshaprasravana, Vala next
reached another excellent and foremost of tirthas called Karavapana. The
hero of the plough, of great strength, having made many presents there,
bathed in the cool, clear, sacred, and sin-cleansing water (of that
tirtha). Passing one night there with the ascetics and the Brahmanas,
Rama then proceeded to the sacred asylum of the Mitra-Varunas. From
Karavapana he proceeded to that spot on the Yamuna where in days of yore
Indra and Agni and Aryaman had obtained great happiness. Bathing there,
that bull of Yadu's race, of righteous soul, obtained great happiness.
The hero then sat himself down with the Rishis and the Siddhas there for
listening to their excellent talk. There where Rama sat in the midst of
that conclave, the adorable Rishi Narada came (in course of his
wandering). Covered with matted locks and attired in golden rays, he bore
in his hands, O king, a staff made of gold and a waterpot made of the
same precious metal. Accomplished in song and dance and adored by gods
and Brahmanas, he had with him a beautiful Vina of melodious notes, made
of the tortoise-shell. A provoker of quarrels and ever fond of quarrels,
the celestial Rishi came to that spot where the handsome Rama was
resting. Standing up and sufficiently honouring the celestial Rishi of
regulated vows, Rama asked him about all that had happened to the Kurus.
Conversant with every duty and usage, Narada then, O king, told him
everything, as it had happened, about the awful extermination of the
Kurus. The son of Rohini then, in sorrowful words, enquired of the Rishi,
saying, 'What is the state of the field? How are those kings now that had
assembled there? I have heard everything before, O thou that art
possessed of the wealth of penances, but my curiosity is great for
hearing it in detail!'
"Narada said, 'Already Bhishma and Drona and the lord of the Sindhus have
fallen! Vikartana's son Karna also hath fallen, with his sons, those
great car-warriors! Bhurishrava too, O son of Rohini, and the valiant
chief of the Madras have fallen! Those and many other mighty heroes that
had assembled there, ready to lay down their lives for the victory of
Duryodhana, those kings and princes unreturning from battle, have all
fallen! Listen now to me, O Madhava, about those that are yet alive! In
the army of Dhritarashtra's son, only three grinders of hosts are yet
alive! They are Kripa and Kritavarma and the valiant son of Drona! These
also, O Rama, have from fear fled away to the ten points of the compass!
After Shalya's fall and the flight of Kripa and the others, Duryodhana,
in great grief, had entered the depths of the Dvaipayana lake. While
lying stretched for rest at the bottom of the lake after stupefying its
waters, Duryodhana was approached by the Pandavas with Krishna and
pierced by them with their cruel words. Pierced with wordy darts, O Rama,
from every side, the mighty and heroic Duryodhana hath risen from the
lake armed with his heavy mace. He hath come forward for fighting Bhima
for the present. Their terrible encounter, O Rama, will take place today!
If thou feelest any curiosity, then hasten, O Madhava, without tarrying
here! Go, if thou wishest, and witness that terrible battle between thy
two disciples!'"
Vaishampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Narada, Rama bade a
respectful farewell to those foremost of Brahmanas and dismissed all
those that had accompanied him (in his pilgrimage). Indeed, he ordered
his attendants, saying, 'Return ye to Dwaraka!' He then descended from
that prince of mountains and that fair hermitage called
Plakshaprasravana. Having listened to the discourse of the sages about
the great merits of tirthas, Rama of unfading glory sang this verse in
the midst of the Brahmanas, 'Where else is such happiness as that in a
residence by the Sarasvati? Where also such merits as those in a
residence by the Sarasvati? Men have departed for heaven, having
approached the Sarasvati! All should ever remember the Sarasvati!
Sarasvati is the most sacred of rivers! Sarasvati always bestows the
greatest happiness on men! Men, after approaching the Sarasvati, will not
have to grieve for their sins either here or hereafter!' Repeatedly
casting his eyes with joy on the Sarasvati, that scorcher of foes then
ascended an excellent car unto which were yoked goodly steeds. Journeying
then on that car of great fleetness, Baladeva, that bull of Yadu's race,
desirous of beholding the approaching encounter of his two disciples
arrived on the field."
