21
"Sanjaya said, 'After the heroic Salwa, that ornament of assemblies, had
been slain, thy army speedily broke like a mighty tree broken by the
force of the tempest. Beholding the army broken, the mighty car-warrior
Kritavarma, possessed by heroism and great strength, resisted the hostile
force in that battle. Seeing the Satwata hero, O king, standing in battle
like a hill pierced with arrows (by the foes), the Kuru heroes, who had
fled away, rallied and came back. Then, O monarch, a battle took place
between the Pandavas and the returned Kurus who made death itself their
goal. Wonderful was that fierce encounter which occurred between the
Satwata hero and his foes, since he resisted the invincible army of the
Pandavas. When friends were seen to accomplish the most difficult feats,
friends, filled with delight, uttered leonine shouts that seemed to reach
the very heavens. At those sounds the Pancalas, O bull of Bharata's race,
became inspired with fear. Then Satyaki, the grandson of Sini, approached
that spot. Approaching king Kshemakirti of great strength, Satyaki
despatched him to Yama's abode, with seven keen shafts. Then the son of
Hridika, of great intelligence, rushed with speed against that bull of
Sini's race, that mighty armed warrior, as the latter came, shooting his
whetted shafts. Those two bowmen, those two foremost of car-warriors,
roared like lions and encountered each other with great force, both being
armed with foremost of weapons. The Pandavas, the Pancalas, and the other
warriors, became spectators of that terrible encounter between the two
heroes. Those two heroes of the Vrishni-Andhaka race, like two elephants
filled with delight, struck each other with long arrows and shafts
equipped with calf-toothed heads. Careering in diverse kinds of tracks,
the son of Hridika and that bull of Sini's race soon afflicted each other
with showers of arrows. The shafts sped with great force from the bows of
the two Vrishni lions were seen by us in the welkin to resemble flights
of swiftly coursing insects. Then the son of Hridika, approaching Satyaki
of true prowess, pierced the four steeds of the latter with four keen
shafts. The long-armed Satyaki, enraged at this, like an elephant struck
with a lance, pierced Kritavarma with eight foremost of arrows. Then
Kritavarma pierced Satyaki with three arrows whetted on stone and sped
from his bow drawn to its fullest and then cut off his bow with another
arrow. Laying aside his broken bow, that bull of Sini's race quickly took
up another with arrow fixed on it. Having taken up that foremost of bows
and stringed it, that foremost of all bowmen, that Atiratha of mighty
energy and great intelligence and great strength, unable to endure the
cutting of his bow by Kritavarma, and filled with fury, quickly rushed
against the latter. With ten keen shafts that bull of Sini's race then
struck the driver, the steeds, and the standard of Kritavarma. At this, O
king, the great bowman and mighty car-warrior Kritavarma, beholding his
gold-decked car made driverless and steedless, became filled with rage.
Uplifting a pointed lance, O sire, he hurled it with all the force of his
arm at that bull of Sini's race, desirous of slaying him. Satyaki,
however, of the Satwata race, striking that lance with many keen arrows,
cut it off into fragments and caused it to fall down, stupefying
Kritavarma of Madhu's race (with his activity and prowess). With another
broad-headed arrow he then struck Kritavarma in the chest. Made steedless
and driverless in that battle by Yuyudhana, skilled in weapons,
Kritavarma came down on the Earth. The heroic Kritavarma having been
deprived of his car by Satyaki in that single combat, all the (Kaurava)
troops became filled with great fear. A great sorrow afflicted the heart
of thy sons, when Kritavarma was thus made steedless and driverless and
carless. Beholding that chastiser of foes made steedless and driverless,
Kripa, O king, rushed at that bull of Sini's race, desirous of
despatching him to Yama's abode. Taking Kritavarma upon his car in the
very sight of all the bowmen, the mighty-armed Kripa bore him away from
the press of battle. After Kritavarma had been made carless and the
grandson of Sini had become powerful on the field, the whole army of
Duryodhana once more turned away from the fight. The enemy, however, did
not see it, for the (Kuru) army was then shrouded with a dusty cloud. All
thy warriors fled, O monarch, except king Duryodhana. The latter,
beholding from a near point that his own army was routed, quickly
rushing, assailed the victorious enemy, alone resisting them all.
Fearlessly that invincible warrior, filled with rage, assailed with keen
arrows all the Pandus, and Dhrishtadyumna the son of Prishta, and
Shikhandi, and the sons of Draupadi, and the large bands of the Pancalas,
and the Kaikeyas, O sire, and the Somakas! With firm determination thy
mighty son stood in battle, even as a blazing and mighty fire on the
sacrificial platform, sanctified with mantras. Even thus, king Duryodhana
careered all over the field, in that battle. His foes could not approach
him then, like living creatures unable to approach the Destroyer. Then
the son of Hridika came there, riding on another car.'"
