32
(Gada-yuddha Parva)
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Thus admonished (by his foes), how, indeed, did
that scorcher of enemies, my heroic and royal son, who was wrathful by
nature, then behave? He had never before listened to admonitions such as
these! He had, again, been treated by all with the respect due to a king!
He, who had formerly grieved to stand in the shade of an umbrella,
thinking he had taken another's shelter, he, who could not endure the
very effulgence of the sun in consequence of his sensitive pride, how
could he endure these words of his foes? Thou hast, with thy own eyes, O
Sanjaya, seen the whole earth, with even her Mlecchas and nomad tribes,
depend upon his grace! Rebuked thus at that spot by the sons of Pandu in
particular, while lying concealed in such a solitary place after having
been deprived of his followers and attendants, alas, what answer did he
make unto the Pandavas upon hearing such bitter and repeated taunts from
his victorious enemies? Tell me everything, O Sanjaya, about it!'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Thus rebuked, O monarch, by Yudhishthira and his
brothers, thy royal son, lying within those waters, O king of kings,
heard those bitter words and became very miserable. Breathing hot and
long sighs repeatedly, the king waved his arms again and again, and
setting his heart on battle, thus answered, from within the waters, the
royal son of Pandu.
"'Duryodhana said, "Ye Parthas, all of you are possessed of friends, of
cars, and of animals! I, however, am alone, cheerless, without a car, and
without an animal! Being alone and destitute of weapons, how can I
venture to fight on foot, against numerous foes all well-armed and
possessed of cars? Do you, however, O Yudhishthira, fight me one at a
time! It is not proper that one should in battle fight many endued with
courage, especially when that one is without armour, fatigued, afflicted
with calamity, exceedingly mangled in his limbs, and destitute of both
animals and troops! I do not entertain the least fear, O monarch, of
either thee, or Vrikodara, the son of Pritha, or Phalguna, or Vasudeva,
or all the Pancalas, or the twins, or Yuyudhana, or all the other troops
thou hast! Standing in battle, alone as I am, I shall resist all of you!
The fame, O king, of all righteous men hath righteousness for its basis!
I say all this to you, observant of both righteousness and fame! Rising
(from this lake), I shall fight all of you in battle! Like the year that
gradually meets all the seasons, I shall meet all of you in fight! Wait,
ye Pandavas! Like the sun destroying by his energy the light of all stars
at dawn, I shall today, though weaponless and carless, destroy all of you
possessed of cars and steeds! Today I shall free myself from the debt I
owe to the many illustrious Kshatriyas (that have fallen for me), to
Bahlika and Drona and Bhishma and the high-souled Karna, to the heroic
Jayadratha and Bhagadatta, to Shalya the ruler of the Madras and
Bhurishrava, to my sons, O chief of Bharata's race, and Shakuni the son
of Subala, to all my friends and well-wishers and kinsmen! Today I shall
free myself from that debt by slaying thee with thy brothers!" With these
words, the (Kuru) king ceased speaking.
"'Yudhishthira said, "By good luck, O Suyodhana, thou knowest the duties
of a Kshatriya! By good luck, O thou of mighty arms, thy heart inclineth
to battle! By good luck, thou art a hero, O thou of Kuru's race, and, by
good luck, thou art conversant with battle, since, single-handed, thou
wishest to meet all of us in battle! Fight any one of us, taking whatever
weapon thou likest! All of us will stand as spectators here! I grant thee
also, O hero, this (other) wish of thy heart, that if thou slayest any of
us, thou shalt then become king! Otherwise, slain by us, go to heaven!"
"'Duryodhana said, "A brave man as thou art, if thou grantest me the
option of fighting only one of you, this mace that I hold in my hand is
the weapon that I select! Let any one amongst you who thinks that he will
be my match come forward and fight with me on foot, armed with mace! Many
wonderful single combats have occurred on cars! Let this one great and
wonderful combat with the mace happen today! Men (while fighting) desire
to change weapons. Let the manner of the fight be changed today, with thy
permission! O thou of mighty arms, I shall, with my mace, vanquish thee
today with all thy younger brothers, as also all the Pancalas and the
Srinjayas and all the other troops thou still hast! I do not cherish the
least fear, O Yudhishthira, of even Shakra himself!'
"'Yudhishthira said, "Rise, rise, O son of Gandhari, and fight me,
Suyodhana! Alone as thou art, fight us, encountering one at a time, thou
of great might, armed with thy mace! Be a man, O son of Gandhari, and
fight with good care! Today thou shalt have to lay down thy life even if
Indra becomes thy ally!"
"Sanjaya continued, 'That tiger among men, thy son, could not bear these
words of Yudhishthira. He breathed long and heavy sighs from within the
water like a mighty snake from within its hole. Struck repeatedly with
such wordy goads, he could not endure it at all, like a horse of high
breed that cannot endure the whip. Agitating the waters with great force,
that valiant warrior rose like a prince of elephants from within the
lake, breathing heavily in rage, and armed with his heavy mace that was
endued with the strength of adamant and decked with gold. Piercing the
solidified waters, thy son rose, shouldering his mace of iron, like the
sun himself scorching everything with his rays. Endued with great
strength, thy son, possessed of great intelligence, began to handle his
heavy mace made of iron and equipped with a sling. Beholding him armed
with mace and resembling a crested mountain or the trident-wielding Rudra
himself casting angry glances on living creatures, they observed that
Bharata chief shedding an effulgence around like the scorching sun
himself in the sky. Indeed, all creatures then regarded that mighty-armed
chastiser of foes, as he stood shouldering his mace after rising from the
waters, looking like the Destroyer himself armed with his bludgeon.
Indeed, all the Pancalas then saw thy royal son to look like the
thunder-wielding Shakra or the trident-bearing Hara. Seeing him, however,
rise from within the waters, all the Pancalas and the Pandavas began to
rejoice and seize each other's hands. Thy son Duryodhana regarded that
action of the spectators to be an insult directed towards him. Rolling
his eyes in wrath, and as if burning the Pandavas with his glances, and
contracting his brow into three furrows, and repeatedly biting his nether
lip, he addressed the Pandavas with Keshava in their midst, saying, "You
Pandavas, you shall have to bear the fruit of these taunts! Slain by me
today, you shall, with the Pancalas, have to repair to the abode of
Yama!"'
"Sanjaya continued, 'Rising from the water, thy son Duryodhana stood
there, armed with mace, and with limbs bathed in blood. Covered with
blood and drenched with water, his body then looked like a mountain
shedding water from within. As he stood armed with mace, the Pandavas
regarded him to be the angry son of Surya himself armed with the bludgeon
called Kinkara. With voice deep as that of the clouds or of a bull
roaring in joy, Duryodhana then, of great prowess, armed with his mace,
summoned the Parthas to battle.'
"'Duryodhana said, "You will have, O Yudhishthira, to encounter me one at
a time! It is not proper, that one hero should fight with many at the
same time, especially when that single warrior is divested of armour,
fatigued with exertion, covered with water, exceedingly mangled in limbs,
and without cars, animals and troops! Let the gods in heaven behold me
fight single-handed destitute of all equipment and deprived of even
armour and weapons! I shall certainly fight all of you! Thou shalt be
judge, as thou hast the necessary qualifications, of the propriety and
impropriety of everything!"
"'Yudhishthira said, "How is it, O Duryodhana, that thou hadst not this
knowledge when many great car-warriors, uniting together, slew Abhimanyu
in battle? Kshatriya duties are exceedingly cruel, unmindful of all
considerations, and without the least compassion! Otherwise, how could
you slay Abhimanyu under those circumstances? All of you were acquainted
with righteousness! All of you were heroes! All of you were prepared to
lay down your lives in battle! The high end declared for those that fight
righteously is the attainment of the regions of Shakra! If this be your
duty, that one should never be slain by many, why is it then that
Abhimanyu was slain by many, acting in accord with thy counsels? All
creatures, when in difficulty forget considerations of virtue. They then
view the gates of the other world to be closed. Put on armour, O hero,
and bind thy locks! Take everything else, O Bharata, of which thou
standest in need! This another wish of thine, O hero, I grant thee in
addition, that if thou canst slay him amongst the five Pandavas with whom
thou wishest an encounter, thou shalt then be king! Otherwise, slain (by
him), thou shalt proceed to heaven! Except thy life, O hero, tell us what
boon we may grant thee."
"Sanjaya continued, 'Then thy son, O king, cased his body with armour
made of gold, and put on a beautiful head-gear adorned with pure gold.
Clad in bright armour of gold, he put on that head-gear. Indeed, O king,
thy son then looked resplendent like a golden cliff. Clad in mail, armed
with mace, and accoutred with other equipments, thy son Duryodhana then,
O king, standing on the field of battle, addressed all the Pandavas,
saying, 'Amongst you (five) brothers, let any one fight me, armed with
mace! As regards myself, I am willing to fight either Sahadeva, or Bhima,
or Nakula, or Phalguna, or thee today, O bull of Bharata's race! Accorded
an encounter, I will fight any one amongst you and will certainly gain
the victory on the field! Today I will reach the end of these hostilities
that is difficult to reach, with the aid, O tiger among men, of my mace
wrapped with cloth of gold. I think, there is none to be my match in an
encounter with the mace! With my mace I shall slay all of you one after
another! Amongst all of you there is no one who is competent to fight
fairly with me! It is not proper for me to speak such words of pride with
respect to my own self! I shall, however, make these words of mine true
in your presence! Within this very hour, these words will become either
true or false! Let him amongst you take up the mace that will fight with
me!'"
