56
"Sanjaya said, 'Meanwhile Vikartana himself, resisting Bhimasena
supported by the Pancalas and the Cedis and the Kaikayas, covered him
with many arrows. In the very sight of Bhimasena, Karna, slew in that
battle many mighty car-warriors among the Cedis, the Karushas, and the
Srinjayas. Then Bhimasena, avoiding Karna, that best of car-warriors,
proceeded against the Kaurava troops like a blazing fire towards a heap
of dry grass. The Suta's son also in that battle, began to slay the
mighty bowmen amongst the Pancalas, the Kaikayas, and the Srinjayas, in
thousands. Indeed, the three mighty car-warriors viz., Partha and
Vrikodara and Karna, began to exterminate the samsaptakas, the Kauravas,
and the Pancalas, respectively. In consequence of thy evil policy, O
king, all these Kshatriyas, scorched with excellent shafts by those three
great warriors, began to be exterminated in that battle. Then Duryodhana,
O chief of the Bharatas, filled with rage, pierced Nakula and his four
steeds with nine arrows. Of immeasurable soul, thy son next, O ruler of
men, cut off the golden standard of Sahadeva with a razor-faced shaft.
Filled with wrath, Nakula then, O king, struck thy son with three and
seventy arrows in that battle, and Sahadeva struck him with five. Each of
those foremost warriors of Bharata's race and foremost of all bowmen, was
struck by Duryodhana in rage with five arrows. With a couple of
broad-headed arrows, then, he cut off the bows of both those warriors;
and then he suddenly pierced each of the twins with three and seventy
arrows. Taking up then two other beautiful and foremost of bows each of
which resembled the bow of Indra himself, those two heroes looked
beautiful like a pair of celestial youths in that battle. Then those two
brothers, both endued with great activity in battle, poured upon their
cousin, O king, ceaseless showers of terrible shafts like two masses of
clouds, pouring rain upon a mountain breast. Thereupon thy son, that
great car-warrior, O king filled with rage, resisted those two great
bowmen, viz., the twin sons of Pandu, with showers of winged arrows. The
bow of Duryodhana in that battle, O Bharata, seemed to be continuously
drawn into a circle, and shafts seemed to issue from it ceaselessly on
all sides. Covered with Duryodhana's shafts the two sons of Pandu ceased
to shine brightly, like the Sun and the Moon in the firmament, divested
of splendour, when shrouded by masses of clouds. Indeed, those arrows, O
king, equipped with wings of gold and whetted on stone, covered all the
points of the compass like the rays of the Sun, when the welkin was thus
shrouded and all that was seen was one uniform expanse of the Destroyer
himself, at the end of the Yuga. Beholding on the other hand, the prowess
of thy son, the great car-warriors all regarded the twin sons of Madri to
be in the presence of Death. The commander then, O king, of the Pandava
army, viz., the mighty car-warrior Parshata (Son of Prishata) proceeded
to that spot where Duryodhana was. Transgressing those two great
car-warriors, viz., the two brave sons of Madri, Dhrishtadyumna began to
resist thy son with his shafts. Of immeasurable soul, that bull among
men, viz., thy son, filled with the desire to retaliate, and smiling the
while, pierced the prince of Pancala with five and twenty arrows. Of
immeasurable soul and filled with the desire to retaliate, thy son once
more pierced the prince of Pancala with sixty shafts and once again with
five, and uttered a loud roar. Then the king, with a sharp razor-faced
arrow, cut off, in that battle, O sire, the bow with arrow fixed thereon
and the leathern fence of his antagonist. Casting aside that broken bow,
the prince of Pancala, that crusher of foes, quickly took up another bow
that was new and capable of bearing a great strain. Blazing with
impetuosity, and with eyes red as blood from rage, the great bowman
Dhrishtadyumna, with many wounds on his person looked resplendent on his
car. Desirous of slaying Duryodhana, O chief of the Bharatas, the Pancala
hero sped five and ten cloth-yard shafts that resembled hissing snakes.
Those shafts, whetted on stone and equipped with the feathers of Kankas
and peacocks, cutting through the armour decked with gold of the king
passed through his body and entered the Earth in consequence of the force
with which they had been shot. Deeply pierced, O monarch, thy son looked
exceedingly beautiful like a gigantic Kinsuka in the season of spring
with its flowery weight. His armour pierced with those shafts, and all
his limbs rendered exceedingly infirm with wounds, he became filled with
rage and cut off Dhrishtadyumna's bow, with a broad-headed arrow. Having
cut off his assailant's bow the king then, O monarch, with great speed,
struck him with ten shafts on the forehead between the two eyebrows.
Those shafts, polished by the hands of the smith, adorned
Dhrishtadyumna's face like a number of bees, desirous of honey, adorning
a full-blown lotus. Throwing aside that broken bow, the high-souled
Dhrishtadyumna quickly took up another, and with it, sixteen broad-headed
arrows. With five he slew the four steeds and the driver of Duryodhana,
and he cut off with another his bow decked with gold. With the remaining
ten shafts, the son of Prishata cut off the car with the upashkara, the
umbrella, the dart, the sword, the mace, and the standard of thy son.
Indeed, all the kings beheld the beautiful standard of the Kuru king,
decked with golden Angadas and bearing the device of an elephant worked
in jewels, cut off by the prince of the Pancalas. Then the uterine
brothers of Duryodhana, O bull of Bharata's race, rescued the carless
Duryodhana who had all his weapons, besides, cut off in that battle. In
the very sight of Dhrishtadyumna, Durdhara, O monarch, causing that ruler
of men to ride upon his car quickly bore him away from the battle.
"'Meanwhile the mighty Karna, having vanquished Satyaki and desirous of
rescuing the (Kuru) king, proceeded straight against the face of Drona's
slayer, that warrior of fierce shafts. The grandson of Sini, however,
quickly pursued him from behind, striking him with his arrows, like an
elephant pursuing a rival and striking him at the hinder limbs with his
tusks. Then, O Bharata, fierce became the battle that raged between the
high-souled warriors of the two armies, in the space that intervened
between Karna and the son of Prishata. Not a single combatant of either
the Pandavas nor ourselves turned his face from the battle. Then Karna
proceeded against the Pancalas with great speed. At that hour when the
Sun had ascended the meridian, great slaughter, O best of men, of
elephants and steeds and men, took place on both sides. The Pancalas, O
king, inspired with the desire of victory, all rushed with speed against
Karna like birds towards a tree. The son of Adhiratha, of great energy,
filled with rage, began from their front to strike those Pancalas, with
the keen points of his shafts, singling out their leaders, viz.,
Vyaghraketu and Susharma and Citra and Ugrayudha and Jaya and Sukla and
Rochamana and the invincible Singhasena. Those heroes, speedily advancing
with their cars, encompassed that foremost of men, and poured their
shafts upon that angry warrior, viz., Karna, that ornament of battle.
That foremost of men endued with great valour, viz., the son of Radha,
afflicted those eight heroes engaged in battle with eight keen shafts.
The Suta's son possessed of great prowess, O king, then slew many
thousands of other warriors skilled in fight. Filled with rage, the son
of Radha then slew Jishnu, and Jishnukarman, and Devapi, O king, in that
battle, and Citra, and Citrayudha, and Hari, and Singhaketu and Rochamana
and the great car-warrior Salabha, and many car-warriors among the Cedis
bathed the form of Adhiratha's son in blood, while he himself was engaged
in taking the lives of those heroes. There, O Bharata, elephants,
assailed with arrows by Karna, fled away on all sides in fear and caused
a great agitation on the field of battle. Others assailed with the shafts
of Karna, uttered diverse cries, and fell down like mountains riven with
thunder. With the fallen bodies of elephants and steeds and men and with
fallen cars, the Earth became strewn along the track of Karna's car.
Indeed, neither Bhishma, nor Drona, nor any other warrior of thy army had
ever achieved such feats as were then achieved by Karna in that battle.
Amongst elephants, amongst steeds, amongst cars and amongst men, the
Suta's son caused a very great carnage, O tiger among men. As a lion is
seen to career fearlessly among a herd of deer, even so Karna careered
fearlessly among the Pancalas. As a lion routeth a herd of terrified deer
to all points of the compass, even so Karna routed those throngs of
Pancala cars to all sides. As a herd of deer that have approached the
jaws of a lion can never escape with life, even so those great
car-warriors that approached Karna could not escape with their lives. As
people are certainly burnt if they come in contact with a blazing fire,
even so the Srinjayas, O Bharata, were burnt by the Karna-fire when they
came in contact with it. Many warriors among the Cedis and the Pancalas,
O Bharata, that were regarded as heroes, were slain by the single-handed
Karna in that battle who fought with them, proclaiming his name, in every
instance. Beholding the prowess of Karna, O king, I thought that a single
Pancala even would not, in that battle, escape from the son of Adhiratha.
Indeed, the Suta's son in that battle repeatedly routed the Pancalas.
"'Beholding Karna thus slaughtering the Pancalas in that dreadful battle,
King Yudhishthira the just rushed in wrath towards him; Dhrishtadyumna
and the sons of Draupadi also, O sire, and hundreds of warriors,
encompassed that slayer of foes viz., the son of Radha. And Shikhandi,
and Sahadeva, and Nakula, and Nakula's son, and Janamejaya, and the
grandson of Sini, and innumerable Prabhadrakas, all endued with
immeasurable energy, advancing with Dhrishtadyumna in their van, looked
magnificent as they struck Karna with shafts and diverse weapons. Like
Garuda falling upon a large number of snakes, the son of Adhiratha,
singlehanded, fell upon all those Cedis and Pancalas and Pandavas in that
encounter. The battle that took place between them and Karna, O monarch,
became exceedingly fierce like that which had occurred in days of old
between the gods and the Danavas. Like the Sun dispelling the surrounding
darkness, Karna fearlessly and alone encountered all those great bowmen
united together and pouring upon him repeated showers of arrows. While
the son of Radha was thus engaged with the Pandavas, Bhimasena, filled
with rage, began to slaughter the Kurus with shafts, every one of which
resembled the lord of Yama. That great bowman, fighting single-handed
with the Bahlikas, and the Kaikayas, the Matsyas, the Vasatas, the
Madras, and Saindhavas, looked exceedingly resplendent. There, elephants,
assailed in their vital limbs by Bhima with his cloth-yard shafts fell
down, with their riders slain, making the Earth tremble with the violence
of their fall. Steeds also, with their riders slain, and foot-soldiers
deprived of life, lay down, pierced with arrows and vomiting blood in
large quantities. Car-warriors in thousands fell down, their weapons
loosened from their hands. Inspired with the fear of Bhima, they lay
deprived of life, their bodies mangled with sounds. The Earth became
strewn with car-warriors and horsemen and elephant-men and drivers and
foot-soldiers and steeds and elephants all mangled with the shafts of
Bhimasena. The army of Duryodhana, O king, cheerless and mangled and
afflicted with the fear of Bhimasena, stood as if stupefied. Indeed that
melancholy host stood motionless in that dreadful battle like the Ocean,
O king, during a calm in autumn. Stupefied, that host stood even like the
Ocean in calm. However endued with wrath and energy and might, the army
of thy son then, divested of its pride, lost all its splendour. Indeed,
the host, whilst thus being slaughtered became drenched with gore and
seemed to bathe in blood. The combatants, O chief of the Bharatas,
drenched with blood, were seen to approach and slaughter one another. The
Suta's son, filled with rage, routed the Pandava division, while
Bhimasena in rage routed the Kurus. And both of them, while thus
employed, looked exceedingly resplendent. During the progress of that
fierce battle filling the spectators with wonder, Arjuna, that foremost
of various persons, having slain a large number of samsaptakas in the
midst of their array, addressed Vasudeva, saying, "This struggling force
of samsaptakas, O Janardana, is broken. Those great car-warriors amongst
the samsaptakas are flying away with their followers, unable to bear my
shafts, like deer unable to bear the roar of the lion. The vast force of
the Srinjayas also seems to break in this great battle. There that banner
of the intelligent Karna, bearing the device of the elephant's rope, O
Krishna, is seen in the midst of Yudhishthira's division, where he is
careering with activity. The other great car-warriors (of our army) are
incapable of vanquishing Karna. Thou knowest that Karna is possessed of
great energy as regards prowess in battle. Proceed thither where Karna is
routing our force. Avoiding (other warriors) in battle, proceed against
the Suta's son, that mighty car-warrior. This is what I wish, O Krishna.
Do, however, that which thou likest." Hearing these words of his, Govinda
smiled, and addressing Arjuna, said, "Slay the Kauravas, O son of Pandu,
without delay." Then those steeds, white as swans, urged by Govinda, and
bearing Krishna and the son of Pandu penetrated thy vast force. Indeed,
thy host broke on all sides as those white steeds in trappings of gold,
urged by Keshava, penetrated into its midst. That ape-bannered car, the
clatter of whose wheels resembled the deep roar of the clouds and whose
flags waved in the air, penetrated into the host like a celestial car
passing through the welkin. Keshava and Arjuna, filled with rage, and
with eyes red as blood, as they penetrated, piercing through thy vast
host, looked exceedingly resplendent in their splendour. Both delighting
in battle, as those two heroes, challenged by the Kurus, came to the
field, they looked like the twin Ashvinis invoked with proper rites in a
sacrifice by the officiating priests. Filled with rage, the impetuosity
of those two tigers among men increased like that of two elephants in a
large forest, enraged at the claps of hunters. Having penetrated into the
midst of that car-force and those bodies of horse, Phalguna careered
within those divisions like the Destroyer himself, armed with the fatal
noose. Beholding him put forth such prowess within his army, thy son, O
Bharata, once more urged the samsaptakas against him. Thereupon, with a
1,000 cars, and 300 elephants, and 14,000 horses, and 200,00 of
foot-soldiers armed with the bow, endued with great courage, of sureness
of aim and conversant with all the ways of battle, the leaders of the
samsaptakas rushed (from every side) towards the son of Kunti (in the
great battle) covering the Pandava, O monarch, with showers of arrows
from all sides. Thus covered with shafts in that battle, Partha, that
grinder of hostile forces, exhibited himself in a fierce form like the
Destroyer himself, armed with the noose. While engaged in slaughtering
the samsaptakas, Partha became a worthy object of sight to all. Then the
welkin became filled with shafts decked with gold and possessed of the
effulgence of lightning that were ceaselessly short by the diadem-decked
Arjuna. Indeed, everything completely shrouded with mighty shafts sped
from Arjuna's arms and falling ceaselessly all around, looked
resplendent, O lord, as if covered with snakes. The son of Pandu, of
immeasurable soul, shot on all sides his straight shafts equipped with
wings of gold and furnished with keen points. In consequence of the sound
of Partha's palms, people thought that the Earth, or the vault of the
welkin, or all the points of the compass, or the several oceans, or the
mountains seemed to split. Having slain 10,000 kshatriyas, Kunti's son,
that mighty car-warrior, then quickly proceeded to the further wing of
the samsaptakas. Repairing to that further wing which was protected by
the Kambojas, Partha began to grind it forcibly with his arrows like
Vasava grinding the Danavas. With broad-headed arrows he began to quickly
cut off the arms, with weapons in grasp, and also the heads of foes
longing to slay him. Deprived of diverse limbs, and of weapons, they
began to fall down on the Earth, like trees of many boughs broken by a
hurricane. While he was engaged in thus slaughtering elephants and steeds
and car-warriors and foot-soldiers, the younger brother of Sudakshina
(the chief of the Kambojas) began to pour showers of arrows on him. With
a couple of crescent-shaped arrows, Arjuna cut off the two arms, looking
like spiked maces, of his striking assailant, and then his head graced
with a face as beautiful as the full moon, with a razor-headed arrow.
Deprived of life, he fell down from his vehicle, his body bathed in
blood, like the thunder-riven summit of a mountain of red arsenic.
Indeed, people saw the tall and exceedingly handsome younger brother of
Sudakshina, the chief of the Kambojas, of eyes resembling lotus petals,
slain and fall down like a column of gold or like a summit of the golden
Sumeru. Then commenced a battle there once more that was fierce and
exceedingly wonderful. The condition of the struggling combatants varied
repeatedly. Each slain with a single arrow, and combatants of the
Kamboja, the Yavana, and the Saka races, fell down bathed in blood, upon
which the whole field of battle became one expanse of red, O monarch. In
consequence of car-warriors deprived of steeds and drivers, and steeds
deprived of riders, and elephants deprived of riders, and riders deprived
of elephants, battling with one another, O king, a great carnage took
place. When the wing and the further wing of the samsaptakas had thus
been exterminated by Savyasaci, the son of Drona quickly proceeded
against Arjuna, that foremost of victorious warriors. Indeed, Drona's son
rushed, shaking his formidable bow, and taking with him many terrible
arrows like the Sun himself appearing with his own rays. With mouth wide
open from rage and with the desire to retaliate, and with red eyes, the
mighty Ashvatthama looked formidable like death himself, armed with his
mace and filled with wrath as at the end of the Yuga. He then shot
showers of fierce shafts. With those shafts sped by him, he began to rout
the Pandava army. As soon as he beheld him of Dasharha's race (Keshava)
on the car, O king, he once more sped at him, and repeated showers of
fierce shafts. With those falling shafts, O monarch, sped by Drona's son,
both Krishna and Dhananjaya were completely shrouded on the car. Then the
valiant Ashvatthama, with hundreds of keen arrows, stupefied both Madhava
and the son of Pandu in that battle. Beholding those two protectors of
all mobile and immobile creatures thus covered with arrows, the universe
of mobile and immobile beings uttered cries of "Oh!" and "Alas!" Crowds
of Siddhas and Charanas began to repair to that spot from every side,
mentally uttering this prayer, viz., "Let good be to all the worlds."
Never before, O king, did I see prowess like that of Drona's son in that
battle while he was engaged in shrouding the two Krishnas with shafts.
The sound of Ashvatthama's bow, inspiring foes with terror, was
repeatedly heard by us in that battle, O king, to resemble that of a
roaring lion. While careering in that battle and striking right and left
the string of his bow looked beautiful like flashes of lightning in the
midst of a mass of clouds. Though endued with great firmness and
lightness of hand the son of Pandu, for all that, beholding the son of
Drona then, became greatly stupefied. Indeed, Arjuna then regarded his
own prowess to be destroyed by his high-souled assailant. The form of
Ashvatthama became such in that battle that men could with difficulty
gaze at it. During the progress of that dreadful battle between Drona's
son and the Pandava, during that time when the mighty son of Drona, O
monarch, thus prevailed over his antagonist and the son of Kunti lost his
energy, Krishna became filled with rage. Inspired with wrath he drew deep
breaths, O king, and seemed to burn with his eyes both Ashvatthama and
Phalguna as he looked at them repeatedly. Filled with rage, Krishna
addressed Partha in an affectionate tone, saying, "This, O Partha, that I
behold in battle regarding thee, is exceedingly strange, since Drona's
son, O Partha, surpasseth thee today! Hast thou not now the energy and
the might of thy arms thou hadst before? Hast thou not that Gandiva still
in thy hands, and dost thou not stay on thy car now? Are not thy two arms
sound? Hath thy fist suffered any hurt? Why is it then that I see the son
of Drona prevail over thee in battle? Do not, O Partha, spare thy
assailant, regarding him as the son of thy preceptor, O bull of Bharata's
race. This is not the time for sparing him." Thus addressed by Krishna,
Partha speedily took up four and ten broad-headed arrows at a time, when
speed was of the highest moment, and with them he cut off Ashvatthama's
bow and standard and umbrella and banners and car and dart and mace. With
a few calf-toothed arrows he then deeply struck the son of Drona in the
latter's shoulder. Thereupon overcome with a deep swoon, Ashvatthama sat
down, supporting himself on his flagstaff. The latter's driver then, O
monarch, desirous of protecting him from Dhananjaya, bore him away
insensible and thus deeply afflicted by the foe. Meanwhile that scorcher
of foes, viz., Vijaya, slaughtered thy troops by hundreds and thousands,
in the very sight of that hero, viz., thy son, O sire. Thus, O king, in
consequence of thy evil counsels, a cruel and awful destruction and
carnage commenced as thy warriors were engaged with the enemy. Within a
short time Vibhatsu routed the samsaptakas: Vrikodara, the Kurus, and
Vasusena, the Pancalas. During the progress of the battle destructive of
great heroes, there rose many headless trunks all around. Meanwhile
Yudhishthira, O chief of the Bharatas, in great pain owing to his wounds,
retreating about two miles from the battle, rested himself for some
time.'"
