33
"Sanjaya said, 'Whilst Duryodhana, O king, was repeatedly roaring in this
strain, Vasudeva, filled with wrath, said these words unto Yudhishthira,
"What rash words hast thou spoken, O king, to the effect, 'Slaying one
amongst us be thou king among the Kurus.' If, indeed, O Yudhishthira,
Duryodhana select thee for battle, or Arjuna, or Nakula, or Sahadeva
(what will be the consequence)? From desire of slaying Bhimasena, O king,
for these thirteen years hath Duryodhana practised with the mace upon a
statue of iron! How then, O bull of Bharata's race, will our purpose be
achieved? From compassion, O best of kings, thou hast acted with great
rashness! I do not at this moment behold a match (for Duryodhana) except
Pritha's son Vrikodara! His practice, again, with the mace, is not so
great! Thou hast, therefore, once more allowed a wretched game of chance
to commence as that one in former days between thyself and Shakuni, O
monarch! Bhima is possessed of might and prowess. King Suyodhana,
however, is possessed of skill! In a contest between might and skill, he
that is possessed of skill, O king, always prevails! Such a foe, O king,
thou hast, by thy words, placed in a position of ease and comfort! Thou
hast placed thine own self, however, in a position of difficulty. We
have, in consequence of this, been placed in great danger! Who is there
that would abandon sovereignty within grasp, after having vanquished all
his foes and when he hath only one foe to dispose of and that one plunged
in difficulties? I do not see that man in the world today, be he a god,
who is competent to vanquish the mace-armed Duryodhana in battle! Neither
thou nor Bhima, nor Nakula nor Sahadeva, nor Phalguna, is capable of
vanquishing Duryodhana in fair fight! King Duryodhana is possessed of
great skill! How then, O Bharata, canst thou say unto such a foe words
such as these, 'Fight, selecting the mace as thy weapon, and if thou
canst slay one amongst us, thou shalt then be king?' If Duryodhana
encounters Vrikodara amongst us wishing to fight fairly with him, even
then our victory would be doubtful. Duryodhana is possessed of great
might and great skill. How couldst thou say unto him, 'Slaying only one
amongst us be thou king'? Without a doubt, the offspring of Pandu and
Kunti are not destined to enjoy sovereignty! They were born for passing
their lives in continued exile in the woods or in mendicancy!"
"'Bhimasena said, "O slayer of Madhu, do not, O delighter of the Yadus,
give way to sorrow! However, difficult to reach it, I shall today reach
the end of these hostilities! Without doubt, I shall slay Suyodhana in
battle! It appears, O Krishna, that the victory of Yudhishthira the just
is certain! This mace of mine is heavier than Duryodhana's by one and a
half times! Do not, O Madhava, give way to grief! I dare fight him,
selecting the mace as the weapon! Let all of you, O Janardana, stand as
spectators of the encounter! What do you say of Suyodhana, I would fight
with the three worlds including the very gods, even if they be armed with
every kind of weapon!"'
"Sanjaya continued, 'After Vrikodara had said these words, Vasudeva,
filled with joy, applauded him highly and said unto him, "Relying on
thee, O thou of mighty arms, king Yudhishthira the just will, without
doubt, get back his own blazing prosperity after the slaughter of all his
foes! Thou hast slain all the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle! At thy
hands many kings and princes and elephants have met with their fate! The
Kalingas, the Magadhas, the Kauravas the Westerners, the Gandharas have
all been slain in dreadful battle, O son of Pandu! Slaying Duryodhana
then, O son of Kunti, bestow the earth with her oceans upon Yudhishthira
the just, like Vishnu (conferring the sovereignty of three worlds) upon
the Lord of Sachi! The wretched son of Dhritarashtra, obtaining thee for
a foe in battle, will, without doubt, meet with his fate! Thou wilt
certainly accomplish thy vow by breaking his bones! Thou shouldst,
however, O son of Pritha, always fight with care with the son of
Dhritarashtra! He is possessed of both skill and strength and always
takes delight in battle!" Then Satyaki, O king, applauded the son of
Pandu. The Pancalas and the Pandavas, also, headed by king Yudhishthira
the just, all applauded those words of Bhimasena. Then Bhima of terrible
might addressed Yudhishthira, who was staying amid the Srinjayas like the
blazing sun himself, saying, "Encountering this one in battle, I venture
to fight with him! This wretch among men is not competent to vanquish me
in fight! Today I shall vomit that wrath which hath been nursed in my
bosom upon Suyodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, like Arjuna throwing fire
on the forest of Khandava! I shall today pluck out the dart, O son of
Pandu, that lay so long sticking to thy heart! Be happy, O king, after I
shall have laid low this wretch with my mace! Today I shall recover, O
sinless one, thy wreath of glory! Today Suyodhana shall abandon his life
breath, his prosperity, and his kingdom! Today king Dhritarashtra also,
hearing of his son's slaughter, will remember all those wrongs (that he
did unto us) arising from the suggestions of Shakuni!" Having said these
words that prince of Bharata's race, possessed of great energy, stood up
for battle, like Shakra summoning Vritra (to an encounter). Unable to
endure that summons, thy son, of great energy, proceeded to the
encounter, like one infuriated elephant proceeding to assail another. The
Pandavas beheld thy son, as he came armed with mace, look like the
crested mountain of Kailasa. Indeed, seeing that mighty son of thine
standing alone like a prince of elephants separated from the herd, the
Pandavas became filled with delight. Standing in battle like a very lion,
Duryodhana had no fear, no alarm, no pain, no anxiety. Beholding him
stand there with uplifted mace like the crested mountain of Kailasa,
Bhimasena, O monarch, addressed him, saying, "Call to thy mind all those
wrongs that king Dhritarashtra and thyself have done unto us! Recollect
what happened at Varanavata! Recollect how Draupadi, while in her season,
was maltreated in the midst of the assembly and how king Yudhishthira was
defeated at dice through Shakuni's suggestion! See now, O thou of wicked
soul, the terrible consequence of those acts as also of the other wrongs
that thou didst unto the innocent Parthas! It is for thee that that
illustrious chief of the Bharatas, the son of Ganga, the grandsire of us
all, lieth now on a bed of arrows, struck down (by us)! Drona also hath
been slain! Karna hath been slain! Shalya of great valour hath been
slain! Yonder Shakuni also, the root of these hostilities, hath been
slain in battle! Thy heroic brothers, as also thy sons, with all thy
troops, have been slain! Other kings also, possessed of heroism, and
never retreating from battle, have been slain. These and many other bulls
among Kshatriyas, as also the Pratikamin, that wretch who had seized the
tresses of Draupadi, have been slain! Thou alone art still alive, thou
exterminator of thy race, thou wretch among men! Thee also I shall today
slay with my mace! Of this there is no doubt! Today, O king, I shall, in
battle, quell all thy pride! I shall destroy also thy hope of
sovereignty, O king, and pay off all thy misdeeds unto the sons of Pandu!"
"'Duryodhana said, "What use is there of many words? Fight now with me!
Today, O Vrikodara, I shall beat out of thee thy desire for battle! Why
dost thou not behold me, O wretch, standing here for an encounter with
the mace? Am I not armed with a formidable mace that looks like a cliff
of Himavat? What foe is there, O wretch, that would venture to vanquish
me armed with this weapon? If it be a fair fight, Purandara himself,
amongst the gods, is not competent for that end! For all those wicked
deeds of mine to which thou hast referred, thou couldst not (hitherto) do
me the slightest injury! By exercising my might, I caused ye to dwell in
the woods, to serve in another's dwelling, to conceal yourselves in
disguises! Your friends and allies also have been slain. Our loss has
been equal! If, then my fall takes place in this battle, that would be
highly praiseworthy. Or, perhaps, Time will be the cause! Up to this day
I have never been vanquished in fair fight on the field of battle! If you
vanquish me by deceit, your infamy will certainly last for ever! That act
of yours will, without doubt, be unrighteous and infamous! Do not, O son
of Kunti, roar fruitlessly in this way like autumnal clouds uncharged
with water! Show all the strength thou hast in battle now!" Hearing these
words of his, the Pandavas with the Srinjayas, all inspired with desire
of victory, applauded them highly. Like men exciting an infuriated
elephant with clapping of hands, all of them then gladdened king
Duryodhana (with those praises and cheers). The elephants that were there
began to grunt and the steeds to neigh repeatedly. The weapons of the
Pandavas, who were inspired with desire of victory blazed forth of their
own accord.'"
