41
Vaishampayana said, "The delighter of the Yadus then proceeded to the
asylum (of Vaka) which resounded with the chanting of the Vedas. There
the great ascetic, O king, named Dalvyavaka poured the kingdom of
Dhritarashtra, the son of Vichitravirya, as a libation (on the
sacrificial fire). By practising very austere penances he emaciated his
own body. Endued with great energy, the virtuous Rishi, filled with great
wrath, (did that act). In former times, the Rishis residing in the
Naimisha forest had performed a sacrifice extending for twelve years. In
course of that sacrifice, after a particular one called Viswajit had been
completed, the Rishis set out for the country of the Pancalas. Arrived
there, they solicited the king for giving them one and twenty strong and
healthy calves to be given away as Dakshina (in the sacrifice they have
completed). Dalvya Vaka, however, (calling those Rishis), said unto them,
'Do you divide those animals (of mine) among you! Giving away these (unto
you), I shall solicit a great king (for some).' Having said so unto all
those Rishis, Vaka of great energy, that best of Brahmanas, then
proceeded to the abode of Dhritarashtra. Arrived at the presence of king
Dhritarashtra, Dalvya begged some animals of him. That best of kings,
however, seeing that some of his kine died without any cause, angrily
said unto him. 'Wretch of a Brahmana, take, if thou likest, these animals
that (are dead)!' Hearing these words, the Rishi, conversant with duties,
thought, 'Alas, cruel are the words that have been addressed to me in the
assembly!' Having reflected in this strain, that best of Brahmanas,
filled with wrath, set his heart upon the destruction of king
Dhritarashtra. Cutting the flesh from off the dead animals, that best of
sages, having ignited a (sacrificial) fire on the tirtha of the
Sarasvati, poured those pieces as libations for the destruction of king
Dhritarashtra's kingdom. Observant of rigid vows, the great Dalvya Vaka,
O monarch, poured Dhritarashtra's kingdom as a libation on the fire, with
the aid of those pieces of meat. Upon the commencement of that fierce
sacrifice according to due rites, the kingdom of Dhritarashtra, O
monarch, began to waste away. Indeed, O lord, the kingdom of that monarch
began to waste away, even as a large forest begins to disappear when men
proceed to cut it down with the axe. Overtaken by calamities, the kingdom
began to lose its prosperity and life. Seeing his kingdom thus afflicted,
the puissant monarch, O king, became very cheerless and thoughtful.
Consulting with the Brahmanas, he began to make great endeavours for
freeing his territories (from affliction). No good, however, came of his
efforts, for the kingdom continued to waste away. The king became very
cheerless. The Brahmanas also, O sinless one, became filled with grief.
When at last the king failed to save his kingdom, he asked his
counsellors. O Janamejaya, (about the remedy). The counsellors reminded
him of the evil he had done in connection with the dead kine. And they
said, 'The sage Vaka is pouring thy kingdom as a libation on the fire
with the aid of the flesh (of those animals). Thence is this great waste
of thy kingdom! This is the consequence of ascetic rites. Thence is this
great calamity! Go, O king, and gratify that Rishi by the side of a
receptacle of water on the bank of the Sarasvati!' Repairing to the bank
of the Sarasvati, the king falling at his feet and touching them with his
head, joined his hands and said, O thou of Bharata's race, these words,
'I gratify thee, O adorable one, forgive my offence. I am a senseless
fool, a wretch inspired with avarice. Thou art my refuge, thou art my
protector, it behoveth thee to show me thy grace!' Beholding him thus
overwhelmed with grief and indulging in lamentations like these, Vaka
felt compassion for him and freed his kingdom. The Rishi became gratified
with him, having dismissed his angry feelings. For freeing his kingdom,
the sage again poured libations on the fire. Having freed the kingdom
(from calamities) and taken many animals in grief, he became pleased at
heart and once more proceeded to the Naimisha woods. The liberal-minded
king Dhritarashtra also, of righteous soul, with a cheerful heart,
returned to his own capital full of prosperity.
"In that tirtha, Brihaspati also, of great intelligence, for the
destruction of the Asuras and the prosperity of the denizens of heaven,
poured libations on the sacrificial fire, with the aid of flesh. Upon
this, the Asuras began to waste away and were destroyed by the gods,
inspired by desire of victory in battle. Having with due rites given unto
the Brahmanas steeds and elephants and vehicles with mules yoked unto
them and jewels of great value and much wealth, and much corn, the
illustrious and mighty-armed Rama then proceeded, O king, to the tirtha
called Yayata. There, O monarch, at the sacrifice of the high-souled
Yayati, the son of Nahusha, the Sarasvati produced milk and clarified
butter. That tiger among men, king Yayati, having performed a sacrifice
there, went cheerfully to heaven and obtained many regions of
blessedness. Once again, O lord, king Yayati performed a sacrifice there.
Beholding his great magnanimity of soul and his immutable devotion to
herself, the river Sarasvati gave unto the Brahamanas (invited to that
sacrifice) everything for which each of them cherished only a wish in his
heart. That foremost of rivers gave unto each where he was, amongst those
that were invited to the sacrifice, houses and beds and food of the six
different kinds of taste, and diverse other kinds of things. The
Brahmanas regarded those valuable gifts as made to them by the king.
Cheerfully they praised the monarch and bestowed their auspicious
blessings upon him. The gods and the Gandharvas were all pleased with the
profusion of articles in that sacrifice. As regards human beings, they
were filled with wonder at sight of that profusion. The illustrious
Baladeva, of soul subdued and restrained and cleansed, having the palmyra
on his banner, distinguished by great righteousness, and ever giving away
the most valuable things, then proceeded to that tirtha of fierce current
called Vasishthapavaha."
