40
Janamejaya said, "Why did the adorable Arshtishena undergo the austerest
of penances? How also did Sindhudwipa acquire the status of a Brahmana?
How also did Devapi, O Brahmana, and how Vishvamitra, O best of men,
acquire the same status? Tell me all this, O adorable one! Great is my
curiosity to listen to all these."
Vaishampayana said, "Formerly, in the Krita age, O king, there was a
foremost of regenerate persons called Arshtishena. Residing in his
preceptor's house, he attended to his lessons every day. Although, O
king, he resided long in the abode of his preceptor, he could not still
acquire the mastery of any branch of knowledge or of the Vedas. O
monarch! In great disappointment, O king, the great ascetic performed
very austere penances. By his penances he then acquired the mastery of
the Vedas, to which there is nothing superior. Acquiring great learning
and a mastery of the Vedas, that foremost of Rishis became crowned with
success in that tirtha. He then bestowed three boons on that place. (He
said), 'From this day, a person, by bathing in this tirtha of the great
river (Sarasvati), shall obtain the great fruit of a horse sacrifice!
From this day there will be no fear in this tirtha from snakes and wild
beasts! By small exertions, again, one shall attain to great result
here!' Having said these words, that Muni of great energy proceeded to
heaven. Even thus the adorable Arshtishena of great energy became crowned
with success. In that very tirtha in the Krita age, Sindhudwipa of great
energy, and Devapi also, O monarch, had acquired the high status of
Brahmanhood. Similarly Kusika's son, devoted to ascetic penances and with
his senses under control, acquired the status of Brahmanhood by
practising well-directed austerities. There was a great Kshatriya,
celebrated over the world, known by the name of Gadhi. He had a son born
to him, of the name of Vishvamitra of great prowess. King Kausika became
a great ascetic. Possessed of great ascetic merit, he wished to install
his son Vishvamitra on his throne, himself having resolved to cast off
his body. His subjects, bowing unto him, said, 'Thou shouldst not go
away, O thou of great wisdom, but do thou protect us from a great fear!'
Thus addressed, Gadhi replied unto his subjects, saying, 'My son will
become the protector of the wide universe!' Having said these words, and
placed Vishvamitra (on the throne), Gadhi, O king, went to heaven, and
Vishvamitra became king. He could not, however, protect the earth with
even his best exertions. The king then heard of the existence of a great
fear of Rakshasas (in his kingdom). With his four kinds of forces, he
went out of his capital. Having proceeded far on his way, he reached the
asylum of Vasishtha. His troops, O king, caused much mischief there. The
adorable Brahmana Vasishtha, when he came to his asylum, saw the
extensive woods in course of destruction. That best of Rishis, Vasishtha,
O king, became angry, O monarch, with Vishvamitra. He commanded his own
(homa) cow, saying, 'Create a number of terrible Savaras!' Thus
addressed, the cow created a swarm of men of frightful visages. These
encountered the army of Vishvamitra and began to cause a great carnage
everywhere. Seeing this, his troops fled away. Vishvamitra, the son of
Gadhi, however, regarding ascetic austerities highly efficacious, set his
heart upon them. In this foremost of tirthas of the Sarasvati, O king, he
began to emaciate his own body by means of vows and fasts with fixed
resolve. He made water and air and (the fallen) leaves of trees his food.
He slept on the bare ground, and observed other vows (enjoined for
ascetics). The gods made repeated attempts for impeding him in the
observance of his vows. His heart, however, never swerved from the vows
(he had proposed to himself). Then, having practised diverse kinds of
austerities with great devotion, the son of Gadhi became like the Sun
himself in effulgence. The boon-giving Grandsire, of great energy,
resolved to grant Vishvamitra, when he had become endued with ascetic
merit, the boon the latter desired. The boon that Vishvamitra solicited
was that he should be permitted to become a Brahmana. Brahma the
Grandsire of all the worlds, said unto him, 'So be it.' Having by his
austere penances acquired the status of Brahmanhood, the illustrious
Vishvamitra, after the attainment of his wish, wandered over the whole
Earth like a celestial. Giving away diverse kinds of wealth in that
foremost of tirthas, Rama also cheerfully gave away milch cows and
vehicles and beds, ornaments, and food and drink of the best kinds, O
king, unto many foremost of Brahmanas, after having worshipped them duly.
Then, O king, Rama proceeded to the asylum of Vaka which was not very
distant from where he was, that asylum in which, as heard by us, Dalvya
Vaka had practised the austerest of penances."
