34
"Sanjaya said, 'When that fierce battle, O monarch, was about to
commence, and when all the high-souled Pandavas had taken their seats,
indeed, having heard that battle between those two heroes, both of whom
were his disciples, was about to begin, Rama, whose banner bore the
device of the palmyra palm, and who owns the plough for his weapon, came
to that spot. Beholding him, the Pandavas, with Keshava, filled with joy
advanced towards him, and receiving him, worshipped him with due rites.
Their worship over, they then, O king, said unto him these words,
"Witness, O Rama, the skill, in battle, of thy two disciples!" Rama then
casting his eyes on Krishna and the Pandavas, and looking at Duryodhana
also of Kuru's race who was standing there armed with mace, said, "Two
and forty days have passed since I left home. I had set out under the
constellation Pushya and have come back under Sravana. I am desirous, O
Madhava, of beholding this encounter with the mace between these two
disciples of mine!" At that time the two heroes, Duryodhana and
Vrikodara, looked resplendent as they stood on the field, both armed with
maces. King Yudhishthira, embracing him owning the plough for his weapon,
duly enquired about his welfare and bade him welcome. Those two great
bowmen, the two illustrious Krishnas, filled with joy, cheerfully saluted
the hero having the plough for his weapon and embraced him. Similarly,
the two sons of Madri and the five sons of Draupadi saluted Rohini's son
of great strength and stood (at a respectful distance). Bhimasena of
great strength and thy son, O monarch, both with uplifted maces (in their
arms), worshipped Valadeva. The other kings honoured him by bidding him
welcome, and then all of them said unto Rama, "Witness this encounter, O
thou of mighty arms!" Even thus those mighty car-warriors said unto the
high-souled son of Rohini. Endued with immeasurable energy, Rama, having
embraced the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, enquired after the welfare of
all the (other) kings. Similarly, all of them, approaching, enquired
after his welfare. The hero of the plough, having in return saluted all
the high-souled Kshatriyas, and having made courteous enquiries about
each according to their years, affectionately embraced Janardana and
Satyaki. Smelling their heads, he enquired after their welfare. Those
two, in return, O king, duly worshipped him, their superior, joyfully,
like Indra and Upendra worshipping Brahman, the lord of the celestials.
Then Dharma's son, O Bharata, said these words unto that chastiser of
foes, the son of Rohini, "Behold, O Rama, this formidable encounter
between the two brothers!" Thus worshipped by those great car-warriors,
the elder brother of Keshava, of mighty arms and great beauty, took his
seat amongst them. Clad in blue robes and possessed of a fair complexion,
Rama, as he sat amidst those kings, looked resplendent like the moon in
the firmament, encompassed by multitudes of stars. Then that dreadful
encounter, making the very hair stand on end, took place between those
two sons of thine, O king, for terminating the quarrel (that had raged
for many years).'"
