42
Janamejaya said, "Why is the current of (the tirtha known by the name of)
Vasishthapavaha so rapid? For what reason did the foremost of rivers bear
away Vasishtha? What, O lord, was the cause of the dispute between
Vasishtha and Vishvamitra? Questioned by me, O thou of great wisdom, tell
me all this! I am never satiated with hearing thee!"
Vaishampayana said, "A great enmity arose between Vishvamitra and
Vasishtha, O Bharata, due to their rivalry in respect of ascetic
austerities. The high abode of Vasishtha was in the tirtha called Sthanu
on the eastern bank of the Sarasvati. On the opposite bank was the asylum
of the intelligent Vishvamitra. There, in that tirtha, O monarch, Sthanu
(Mahadeva) had practised the austerest penances. Sages still speak of
those fierce feats. Having performed a sacrifice there and worshipped the
river Sarasvati, Sthanu established that tirtha there. Hence it is known
by the name Sthanu-tirtha, O lord. In that tirtha, the celestials had, in
days of yore, O king, installed Skanda, that slayer of the enemies of the
gods, in the supreme command of their army. Unto that tirtha of the
Sarasvati, the great Rishi Vishvamitra, by the aid of his austere
penances, brought Vasishtha. Listen to that history. The two ascetics
Vishvamitra and Vasishtha, O Bharata, every day challenged each other
very earnestly in respect of the superiority of their penances. The great
Muni Vishvamitra, burning (with jealousy) at sight of the energy of
Vasishtha, began to reflect on the matter. Though devoted to the
performance of his duties, this, however, is the resolution, O Bharata,
that he formed: 'This Sarasvati shall quickly bring, by force of her
current, that foremost of ascetics, Vasishtha, to my presence. After he
shall have been brought hither, I shall, without doubt, slay that
foremost of regenerate ones.' Having settled this, the illustrious and
great Rishi Vishvamitra with eyes red in wrath, thought of that foremost
of rivers. Thus remembered by the ascetic, she became exceedingly
agitated. The fair lady, however, repaired to that Rishi of great energy
and great wrath. Pale and trembling, Sarasvati, with joined hands
appeared before that foremost of sages. Indeed, the lady was much
afflicted with grief, even like a woman who has lost her mighty lord. And
she said unto that best of sages, 'Tell me what is there that I shall do
for thee.' Filled with rage, the ascetic said unto her, 'Bring hither
Vasishtha without delay, so that I may slay him.' Hearing these words the
river became agitated. With joined hands the lotus-eyed lady began to
tremble exceedingly in fear like a creeper shaken by the wind. Beholding
the great river in that plight, the ascetic said unto her, 'Without any
scruple, bring Vasishtha unto my presence!' Hearing these words of his,
and knowing the evil he intended to do, and acquainted also with the
prowess of Vasishtha that was unrivalled on earth, she repaired to
Vasishtha and informed him of what the intelligent Vishvamitra had said
unto her. Fearing the curse of both, she trembled repeatedly. Indeed, her
heart was on the grievous curse (that either of them might pronounce on
her). She stood in terror of both. Seeing her pale and plunged in
anxiety, the righteous-souled Vasishtha, that foremost of men, O king,
said these words unto her.
"Vasishtha said, 'O foremost of rivers, save thyself! O thou of rapid
current, bear me away, otherwise Vishvamitra will curse thee. Do not feel
any scruple.' Hearing these words of that compassionate Rishi, the river
began to think, O Kauravya, as to what course would be best for her to
follow. Even these were the thoughts that arose in her mind: 'Vasishtha
showeth great compassion for me. It is proper for me that I should serve
him.' Beholding then that best of Rishis, (Vasishtha) engaged in silent
recitation (of mantras) on her bank, and seeing Kusika's son
(Vishvamitra) also engaged in homa, Sarasvati thought, 'Even this is my
opportunity.' Then that foremost of rivers, by her current, washed away
one of her banks. In washing away that bank, she bore Vasishtha away.
While being borne away, O king, Vasishtha praised the river in these
words: 'From the Grandsire's (manasa) lake thou hast taken thy rise, O
Sarasvati! This whole universe is filled with thy excellent waters!
Wending through the firmament, O goddess, thou impartest thy waters to
the clouds! All the waters are thee! Through thee we exercise our
thinking faculties! Thou art Pushti and Dyuti, Kirti, and Siddhi and Uma!
Thou art Speech, and thou art Svaha! This whole universe is dependent on
thee! It is thou that dwellest in all creatures, in four forms!' Thus
praised by that great Rishi, Sarasvati, O king, speedily bore that
Brahmana towards the asylum of Vishvamitra and repeatedly represented
unto the latter the arrival of the former. Beholding Vasishtha thus
brought before him by Sarasvati, Vishvamitra, filled with rage, began to
look for a weapon wherewith to slay that brahmana. Seeing him filled with
wrath, the river from fear of (witnessing and aiding in) a brahmana's
slaughter, quickly bore Vasishtha away to her eastern bank once more. She
thus obeyed the words of both, although she deceived the son of Gadhi by
her act. Seeing that best of Rishis, Vasishtha, borne away, the
vindictive Vishvamitra, filled with wrath, addressed Sarasvati. saying,
'Since, O foremost of rivers, thou hast gone away, having deceived me,
let thy current be changed into blood that is acceptable to Rakshasas.'
Then, cursed by the intelligent Vishvamitra, Sarasvati flowed for a whole
year, bearing blood mixed with water. The gods, the Gandharvas, and the
Apsaras, beholding the Sarasvati reduced to that plight, became filled
with great sorrow. For this reason, O king, the tirtha came to be called
Vasishthapravaha on earth. The foremost of rivers, however, once more got
back her own proper condition."
