46
Vaishampayana said, "Listen now to the large bands of the mothers, those
slayers of foes, O hero, that became the companions of Kumara, as I
mention their names. Listen, O Bharata, to the names of those illustrious
mothers. The mobile and immobile universe is pervaded by those auspicious
ones. They are Prabhavati, Vishalakshi, Palita, Gonasi, Shrimati, Bahula,
Bahuputrika, Apsujata, Gopali, Brihadambalika, Jayavati, Malatika,
Dhruvaratna, Bhayankari, Vasudama, Sudama, Vishoka, Nandini, Ekacuda,
Mahacuda, Cakranemi, Uttejani, Jayatsena, Kamalakshi, Shobhana,
Shatrunjaya, Shalabhi, Khari, Madhavi, Shubhavaktra, Tirthanemi,
Gitapriya, Kalyani, Kadrula, Amitashana, Meghasvana, Bhogavati, Subhru,
Kanakavati, Alatakshi, Viryavati, Vidyujjihva, Padmavati, Sunakshatra,
Kandara, Bahuyojana, Santanika, Kamala, Mahabala, Sudama, Bahudama,
Suprabha, Yashasvini, Nrityapriya, Shatolukhalamekhala, Shataghanta,
Shatananda, Bhagananda, Bhamini, Vapushmati, Candrashita, Bhadrakali,
Samkarika, Nishkutika, Bhrama, Catvaravasini, Sumangala, Svastimati,
Vriddhikama, Jayapriya, Dhanada, Suprasada, Bhavada, Jaleshvari, Edi,
Bhedi, Samedi, Vetalajanani, Kanduti, Kalika, Devamitra, Lambasi, Ketaki,
Citrasena, Bala, Kukkutika, Shankhanika, Jarjarika, Kundarika, Kokalika,
Kandara, Shatodari, Utkrathini, Jarena, Mahavega, Kankana, Manojava,
Kantakini, Praghasa, Putana, Khashaya, Curvyuti, Vama, Kroshanatha,
Taditprabha, Mandodari, Tunda, Kotara, Meghavasini, Subhaga, Lambini,
Lamba, Vasucuda, Vikatthani, Urdhvavenidhara, Pingakshi, Lohamekhala,
Prithuvaktra, Madhurika, Madhukumbha, Pakshalika, Manthanika, Jarayu,
Jarjaranana, Khyata, Dahadaha, Dhamadhama, Khandakhanda, Pushana,
Manikundala, Amogha, Lambapayodhara, Venuvinadhara, Pingakshi,
Lohamekhala, Shasholukamukhi, Krishna, Kharajangha, Mahajava,
Shishumaramukhi, Shveta, Lohitakshi, Vibhishana, Jatalika, Kamacari,
Dirghajihva, Balotkata, Kaledika, Vamanika, Mukuta, Lohitakshi, Mahakaya,
Haripindi, Ekakshara, Sukusuma, Krishnakarni, Kshurakarni, Catushkarni,
Karnapravarana, Catushpathaniketa, Gokarni, Mahishanana, Kharakarni,
Mahakarni, Bherisvanamahasvana, Shankhakumbhasvana, Bhangada, Gana,
Sugana, Bhiti, Kamada, Catushpatharata, Bhutirtha, Anyagocara, Pashuda,
Vittada, Sukhada, Mahayasha, Payoda, Gomahishada, Suvishana, Pratishtha,
Supratishtha, Rocamana, Surocana, Naukarni, Mukhakarni, Sasira, Stherika,
Ekacakra, Megharava, Meghamala, and Virocana.
These and many other mothers, O bull of Bharata's race, numbering by
thousands, of diverse forms, became the followers of Kartikeya. Their
nails were long, their teeth were large and their lips also, O Bharata,
were protruding. Of straight forms and sweet features, all of them,
endowed with youth, were decked with ornaments. Possessed of ascetic
merit, they were capable of assuming any form at will. Having not much
flesh on their limbs, they were of fair complexions and endued with
splendour like that of gold. Some amongst them were dark and looked like
clouds in hue and some were of the colour of smoke, O bull of Bharata's
race. And some were endued with the splendour of the morning sun and were
highly blessed. Possessed of long tresses, they were clad in robes of
white. The braids of some were tied upwards, and the eyes of some were
tawny, and some had girdles that were very long. Some had long stomachs,
some had long ears, and some had long breasts. Some had coppery eyes and
coppery complexion, and the eyes of some were green.
Capable of granting boons and of travelling at will, they were always
cheerful. Possessed of great strength, some amongst them partook of the
nature of Yama, some of Rudra, some of Soma, some of Kuvera, some of
Varuna, some of Indra, and some of Agni, O scorcher of foes. And some
partook of the nature of Vayu, some of Kumara, some of Brahma, O bull of
Bharata's race, and some of Vishnu and some of Surya, and some of Varaha.
Of charming and delightful features, they were beautiful like the asuras.
In voice they resembled the kokila and in prosperity they resembled the
Lord of Treasures. In battle, their energy resembled that of Shakra. In
splendour they resembled fire. In battle they always inspired their foes
with terror. Capable of assuming any form at will, in fleetness they
resembled the very wind. Of inconceivable might and energy, their prowess
also was inconceivable.
They have their abodes on trees and open spots and crossings of four
roads. They live also in caves and crematoriums, mountains and springs.
Adorned with diverse kinds of ornaments, they wear diverse kinds of
attire, and speak diverse languages. These and many other tribes (of the
mothers), all capable of inspiring foes with dread, followed the
high-souled Kartikeya at the command of the chief of the celestials.
The adorable chastiser of Paka, O tiger among kings, gave unto Guha
(Kartikeya) a dart for the destruction of the enemies of the gods. That
dart produces a loud whiz and is adorned with many large bells. Possessed
of great splendour, it seemed to blaze with light. And Indra also gave
him a banner effulgent as the morning sun. Shiva gave him a large army,
exceedingly fierce and armed with diverse kinds of weapons, and endued
with great energy begotten of ascetic penances. Invincible and possessing
all the qualities of a good army, that force was known by the name of
dhananjaya. It was protected by thirty 30,000 warriors each of whom was
possessed of might equal to that of Rudra himself. That force knew not
how to fly from battle. Vishnu gave him a triumphal garland that enhances
the might of the wearer. Uma gave him two pieces of cloth of effulgence
like that of the Sun. With great pleasure Ganga gave unto Kumara a
celestial water-pot, begotten of amrita, and Brihaspati gave him a sacred
stick. Garuda gave him his favourite son, a peacock of beautiful
feathers. Aruna gave him a cock of sharp talons. The royal Varuna gave
him a snake of great energy and might. The lord Brahma gave unto that god
devoted to Brahman a black deer-skin. And the Creator of all the worlds
also gave him victory in all battles.
Having obtained the command of the celestial forces, Skanda looked
resplendent like a blazing fire of bright flames. Accompanied by those
companions and the mothers, he proceeded for the destruction of the
daityas, gladdening all the foremost of the gods. The terrible host of
celestials, furnished with standards adorned with bells, and equipped
with drums and conchs and cymbals, and armed with weapons, and decked
with many banners, looked beautiful like the autumnal firmament
bespangled with planets and stars.
Then that vast assemblage of celestials and diverse kinds of creatures
began cheerfully to beat their drums and blow their conchs numbering
thousands. And they also played on their patahas and jharjharas and
krikacas and cow-horns and adambaras and gomukhas and dindimas of loud
sound. All the gods, with Vasava at their head, praised Kumara. The
celestials and the gandharvas sang and the apsaras danced.
Well-pleased (with these attentions) Skanda granted a boon unto all the
gods, saying, 'I shall slay all your foes,' then, that is, that desire to
slay you. Having obtained this boon from that best of gods, the
illustrious celestials regarded their foes to be already slain. After
Skanda had granted that boon, a loud sound arose from all those creatures
inspired with joy, filling the three worlds.
Accompanied by that vast host, Skanda then set out for the destruction of
the daityas and the protection of the denizens of heaven. Exertion, and
Victory, and Righteousness, and Success, and Prosperity, and Courage, and
the Scriptures (in their embodied forms) proceeded in the van of
Kartikeya's army, O king! With that terrible force, which was armed with
lances, mallets, blazing brands, maces, heavy clubs, arrows, darts and
spears, and which was decked with beautiful ornaments and armour, and
which uttered roars like those of a proud lion, the divine Guha set out.
Beholding him, all the daityas, rakshasas and danavas, anxious with fear,
fled away on all sides. Armed with diverse weapons, the celestials
pursued them. Seeing (the foe flying away), Skanda, endued with energy
and might, became inflamed with wrath. He repeatedly hurled his terrible
weapon, the dart (he had received from Agni). The energy that he then
displayed resembled a fire fed with libations of clarified butter. While
the dart was repeatedly hurled by Skanda of immeasurable energy, meteoric
flashes, O king, fell upon the Earth. Thunderbolts also, with tremendous
noise, fell upon the earth. Everything became as frightful O king, as it
becomes on the day of universal destruction. When that terrible dart was
once hurled by the son of Agni, millions of darts issued from it, O bull
of Bharata's race.
The puissant and adorable Skanda, filled with joy, at last slew Taraka,
the chief of the daityas, endued with great might and prowess, and
surrounded (in that battle) by a 100,000 heroic and mighty daityas. He
then, in that battle, slew Mahisha who was surrounded by eight padmas of
daityas. He next slew Tripada who was surrounded by a 1,000 ajutas of
daityas. The puissant Skanda then slew Hradodara, who was surrounded by
ten nikharvas of daityas, with all his followers armed with diverse
weapons. Filling the ten points of the compass, the followers of Kumara,
O king, made a loud noise while those daityas were being slain, and
danced and jumped and laughed in joy.
Thousands of daityas, O king, were burnt with the flames that issued from
Skanda's dart, while others breathed their last, terrified by the roars
of Skanda. The three worlds were frightened at the yawns of Skanda's
soldiers. The foes were consumed with flames produced by Skanda. Many
were slain by his roars alone. Some amongst the foes of the gods, struck
with banners, were slain. Some, frightened by the sounds of bells, fell
down on the surface of the Earth. Some, mangled with weapons, fell down,
deprived of life. In this way the heroic and mighty Kartikeya slew
innumerable foes of the gods possessed of great strength that came to
fight with him.
Then Bali's son Vana of great might, getting upon the Kraunca mountain,
battled with the celestial host. Possessed of great intelligence, the
great generalissimo Skanda rushed against that foe of the gods. From fear
of Kartikeya, he took shelter within the Kraunca mountain. Inflamed with
rage, the adorable Kartikeya then pierced that mountain with that dart
given him by Agni. The mountain was called Kraunca (crane) because of the
sound it always produced resembled the cry of a crane. That mountain was
variegated with shala trees. The apes and elephants on it were
affrighted. The birds that had their abode on it rose up and wheeled
around in the welkin. The snakes began to dart down its sides. It
resounded also with the cries of leopards and bears in large numbers that
ran hither and thither in fear. Other forests on it rang with the cries
of hundreds upon hundreds of animals. Sharabhas and lions suddenly ran
out. In consequence of all this that mountain, though it was reduced to a
very pitiable plight, still assumed a very beautiful aspect. The
vidyadharas dwelling on its summits soared into the air. The kinnaras
also became very anxious, distracted by the fear caused by the fall of
Skanda's dart. The daityas then, by hundreds and thousands, came out of
that blazing mountain, all clad in beautiful ornaments and garlands.
The followers of Kumara, prevailing over them in battle, slew them all.
The adorable Skanda, inflamed with rage, quickly slew the son of daitya
chief (Bali) along with his younger brother, even as Indra had slain
Vritra (in days before). The slayer of hostile heroes, Agni's son,
pierced with his dart the Kraunca mountain, dividing his own self
sometimes into many and sometimes uniting all his portions into one.
Repeatedly hurled from his hand, the dart repeatedly came back to him.
Even such was the might and glory of the adorable son of Agni. With
redoubled heroism, and energy and fame and success, the god pierced the
mountain and slew hundreds of daityas. The adorable god, having thus
slain the enemies of the celestials, was worshipped and honoured by the
latter and obtained great joy.
After the Kraunca mountain had been pierced and after the son of Canda
had been slain, drums were beaten, O king, and conchs were blown. The
celestial ladies rained floral showers in succession upon that divine
lord of yogis. Auspicious breezes began to blow, bearing celestial
perfumes. The gandharvas hymned his praises, as also great rishis always
engaged in the performance of sacrifices. Some speak of him as the
puissant son of the Grandsire, Sanat-kumara, the eldest of all the sons
of Brahma. Some speak of him as the son of Maheshvara, and some as that
of Agni. Some again describe him as the son of Uma or of the Krittikas or
of Ganga. Hundreds and thousands of people speak of that Lord of yogis of
blazing form and great might, as the son of one of those, or of either of
two of those, or of any one of four of those.
I have thus told thee, O king, everything about the installation of
Kartikeya. Listen now to the history of the sacredness of that foremost
of tirthas on the Sarasvati. That foremost of tirthas, O monarch, after
the enemies of the gods had been slain, became a second heaven. The
puissant son of Agni gave unto each of the foremost ones among the
celestials diverse kinds of dominion and affluence and at last the
sovereignty of the three worlds. Even thus, O monarch, was that adorable
exterminator of the daityas installed by the gods as their generalissimo.
That other tirtha, O bull of Bharata's race, where in days of yore Varuna
the lord of waters had been installed by the celestials, is known by the
name of Taijasa. Having bathed in that tirtha and adored Skanda, Rama
gave unto the brahmanas gold and clothes and ornaments and other things.
Passing one night there, that slayer of hostile heroes, Madhava, praising
that foremost of tirthas and touching its water, became cheerful and
happy. I have now told thee everything about which thou hadst enquired,
how the divine Skanda was installed by the assembled gods!"
