
SECTION CLXL
"Vaisampayana continued, 'When all the monarchs had desisted from
stringing that bow, the high-souled Jishnu arose from among the crowd of
Brahmanas seated in that assembly. And beholding Partha possessing the
complexion of Indra's banner, advancing towards the bow, the principal
Brahmanas shaking their deer-skins raised a loud clamour. And while some
were displeased, there were others that were well-pleased. And some there
were, possessed of intelligence and foresight, who addressing one another
said, 'Ye Brahmanas, how can a Brahmana stripling unpractised in arms and
weak in strength, string that bow which such celebrated Kshatriyas as
Salya and others endued with might and accomplished in the science and
practice of arms could not? If he doth not achieve success in this
untried task which he hath undertaken from a spirit of boyish
unsteadiness, the entire body of Brahmanas here will be rendered
ridiculous in the eyes of the assembled monarchs. Therefore, forbid this
Brahmana that he may not go to string the bow which he is even now
desirous of doing from vanity, childish daring, or mere unsteadiness.'
Others replied, 'We shall not be made ridiculous, nor shall we incur the
disrespect of anybody or the displeasure of the sovereigns. Some
remarked, 'This handsome youth is even like the trunk of a mighty
elephant, whose shoulders and arms and thighs are so well-built, who in
patience looks like the Himavat, whose gait is even like that of the
lion, and whose prowess seems to be like that of an elephant in rut, and
who is so resolute, that it is probable that he will accomplish this
feat. He has strength and resolution. If he had none, he would never go
of his own accord. Besides, there is nothing in the three worlds that
Brahmanas of all mortal men cannot accomplish. Abstaining from all food
or living upon air or eating of fruits, persevering in their vows, and
emaciated and weak, Brahmanas are ever strong in their own energy. One
should never disregard a Brahmana whether his acts be right or wrong, by
supposing him incapable of achieving any task that is great or little, or
that is fraught with bliss or woe. Rama the son of Jamadagni defeated in
battle, all the Kshatriyas. Agastya by his Brahma energy drank off the
fathomless ocean. Therefore, say ye, 'Let this youth bend the bow and
string it with ease' (and many said), 'So be it.' And the Brahmanas
continued speaking unto one another these and other words. Then Arjuna
approached the bow and stood there like a mountain. And walking round
that bow, and bending his head unto that giver of boons--the lord
Isana--and remembering Krishna also, he took it up. And that bow which
Rukma, Sunitha, Vakra, Radha's son, Duryodhana, Salya, and many other
kings accomplished in the science and practice of arms, could not even
with great exertion, string, Arjuna, the son of Indra, that foremost of
all persons endued with energy and like unto the younger brother of Indra
(Vishnu) in might, strung in the twinkling of an eye. And taking up the
five arrows he shot the mark and caused it to fall down on the ground
through the hole in the machine above which it had been placed. Then
there arose a loud uproar in the firmament, and the amphitheatre also
resounded with a loud clamour. And the gods showered celestial flowers on
the head of Partha the slayer of foes. And thousands of Brahmanas began
to wave their upper garments in joy. And all around, the monarchs who had
been unsuccessful, uttered exclamations of grief and despair. And flowers
were rained from the skies all over the amphitheatre. And the musicians
struck up in concert. Bards and heralds began to chant in sweet tones the
praises (of the hero who accomplished the feat). And beholding Arjuna,
Drupada--that slayer of foes,--was filled with joy. And the monarch
desired to assist with his forces the hero if the occasion arose. And
when the uproar was at its height, Yudhishthira, the foremost of all
virtuous men, accompanied by those first of men the twins, hastily left
the amphitheatre for returning to his temporary home. And Krishna
beholding the mark shot and beholding Partha also like unto Indra
himself, who had shot the mark, was filled with joy, and approached the
son of Kunti with a white robe and a garland of flowers. And Arjuna the
accomplisher of inconceivable feats, having won Draupadi by his success
in the amphitheatre, was saluted with reverence by all the Brahmanas. And
he soon after left the lists followed close by her who thus became his
wife.'"
