SECTION V
"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou that knowest the truths of religion, I wish
to hear of the merits of compassion, and of the characteristics of devout
men. Do thou, O sire, describe them to me.'
"Bhishma said, In this connection, this ancient legend, the story of
Vasava and the high-minded Suka, is cited as an illustration. In the
territories of the king of Kasi, a fowler, having poisoned arrows with
him went out of his village on a hunting excursion in search of
antelopes. Desirous of obtaining, meat, when in a big forest in pursuit
of the chase, he discovered a drove of antelopes not far from him, and
discharged his arrow at one of them. The arrows of that folder of
irresistible arms, discharged for the destruction of the antelope, missed
its aim and pierced a mighty forest-tree. The tree, violently pierced
with that arrow tipped with virulent poison, withered away, shedding its
leaves and fruits. The tree having thus withered a parrot that had lived
in a hollow of its trunk all his life, did not leave his nest out of
affection for the lord of the forest. Motionless and without food silent
and sorrowful, that grateful and virtuous parrot also withered away with
the tree. The conqueror of Paka (Indra) was struck with wonder upon
finding that high-souled, and generous-hearted bird thus uninfluenced by
misery or happiness and possessing extraordinary resolution. Then the
thought arose in Sakra's mind,--How could this bird come to possess
humane and generous feelings which are impossible in one belonging to the
world of lower animals? Perchance, there is nothing wonderful in the
matter, for all creatures are seen to evince kindly and generous feelings
towards others.--Assuming then the shape of a Brahmana, Sakra descended
on the Earth and addressing the bird, said,--O Suka, O best of birds, the
grand-daughter (Suki) of Daksha has become blessed (by having thee as her
offspring). I ask thee, for what reason dost thou not leave this withered
tree?--Thus questioned, the Suka bowed unto him and thus
replied:--Welcome to thee O chief of the gods, I have recognised thee by
the merit of my austere penances--Well-done, well-done!--exclaimed the
thousand-eyed deity. Then the latter praised him in his mind, saying,--O,
how wonderful is the knowledge which he possesses.--Although the
destroyer of Vala knew that parrot to be of a highly virtuous character
and meritorious in action, he still enquired of him about the reason of
his affection for the tree. This tree is withered and it is without
leaves and fruits and is unfit to be the refuge of birds. Why dost thou
then cling to it? This forest, too, is vast and in this wilderness there
are numerous other fine trees whose hollows are covered with leaves and
which thou canst choose freely and to thy heart's content. O patient one
exercising due discrimination in thy wisdom, do thou forsake this old
tree that is dead and useless and shorn of all its leaves and no longer
capable of any good.'"
"Bhishma said, 'The virtuous Suka, hearing these words of Sakra, heaved a
deep sigh and sorrowfully replied unto him, saying--O consort of Sachi,
and chief of the gods, the ordinances of the deities are always to be
obeyed. Do thou listen to the reason of the matter in regard to which
thou hast questioned me. Here, within this tree, was I born, and here in
this tree have I acquired all the good traits of my character, and here
in this tree was I protected in my infancy from the assaults of my
enemies. O sinless one, why art thou, in thy kindness, tampering with the
principle of my conduct in life? I am compassionate, and devoutly intent
on virtue, and steadfast in conduct. Kindliness of feeling is the great
test of virtue amongst the good, and this same compassionate and humane
feeling is the source of perennial felicity to the virtuous. All the gods
question thee to remove their doubts in religion, and for this reason, O
lord, thou hast been placed in sovereignty over them all. It behoves thee
not, O thousand-eyed one, to advise me now to abandon this tree for ever.
When it was capable of good, it supported my life. How can I forsake it
now?--The virtuous destroyer of Paka, pleased with these well-meant words
of the parrot, thus said to him:--I am gratified with thy humane and
compassionate disposition. Do thou ask a boon of me.--At this, the
compassionate parrot craved this boon of him, saying,--Let this tree
revive.--Knowing the great attachment of the parrot to that tree and his
high character, Indra, well-pleased, caused the tree to be quickly
sprinkled over with nectar. Then that tree became replenished and
attained to exquisite grandeur through the penances of the parrot, and
the latter too, O great king, at the close of his life, obtained the
companionship of Sakra by virtue of that act of compassion. Thus, O lord
of men, by communion and companionship with the pious, people attain all
the objects of their desire even as the tree die through its
companionship with the parrot.'"
