
SECTION CLXXXIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then those youthful princes adorned with ear-rings,
vying with one another and each regarding himself accomplished in arms
and gifted with might, stood up brandishing their weapons. And
intoxicated with pride of beauty, prowess, lineage, knowledge, wealth,
and youth, they were like Himalayan elephants in the season of rut with
crowns split from excess of temporal juice. And beholding each other with
jealousy and influenced by the god of desire, they suddenly rose up from
their royal seats, exclaiming 'Krishna shall be mine.' And the Kshatriyas
assembled in that amphitheatre, each desirous of winning the daughter of
Drupada, looked like the celestial (of old) standing round Uma, the
daughter of the King of mountains. Afflicted with the shafts of the god
of the flowery bow and with hearts utterly lost in the contemplation of
Krishna, those princes descended into the amphitheatre for winning the
Panchala maiden and began to regard even their best friends with
jealousy. And there came also the celestials on their cars, with the
Rudras and the Adityas, the Vasus and the twin Aswins, the Swadhas and
all the Marutas, and Kuvera with Yama walking ahead. And there came also
the Daityas and the Suparnas, the great Nagas and the celestial Rishis,
the Guhyakas and the Charanas and Viswavasu and Narada and Parvata, and
the principal Gandharvas with Apsaras. And Halayudha (Valadeva) and
Janardana (Krishna) and the chief of the Vrishni, Andhaka, and Yadava
tribes who obeyed the leadership of Krishna were also there, viewing the
scene. And beholding those elephants in rut--the five
(Pandavas)--attracted towards Draupadi like mighty elephants towards a
lake overgrown with lotuses, or like fire covered with ashes, Krishna the
foremost of Yadu heroes began to reflect. And he said unto Rama
(Valadeva), 'That is Yudhishthira; that is Bhima with Jishnu (Arjuna);
and those are the twin heroes.' And Rama surveying them slowly cast a
glance of satisfaction at Krishna. Biting their nether lips in wrath, the
other heroes there--sons and grandsons of kings--with their eyes and
hearts and thoughts set on Krishna, looked with expanded eyes on Draupadi
alone without noticing the Pandavas. And the sons of Pritha also, of
mighty arms, and the illustrious twin heroes, beholding Draupadi, were
all likewise struck by the shafts of Kama. And crowded with celestial
Rishis and Gandharvas and Suparnas and Nagas and Asuras and Siddhas, and
filled with celestial perfumes and scattered over with celestial flowers,
and resounding with the kettle-drum and the deep hum of infinite voices,
and echoing with the softer music of the flute, the Vina, and the tabor,
the cars of the celestials could scarcely find a passage through the
firmament. Then those princes--Karna, Duryodhana, Salwa, Salya,
Aswatthaman, Kratha, Sunitha, Vakra, the ruler of Kalinga and Banga,
Pandya, Paundra, the ruler of Videha, the chief of the Yavanas, and many
other sons and grandsons of kings,--sovereigns of territories with eyes
like lotus-petals,--one after another began to exhibit prowess for
(winning) that maiden of unrivalled beauty. Adorned with crowns,
garlands, bracelets, and other ornaments, endued with mighty arms,
possessed of prowess and vigour and bursting with strength and energy,
those princes could not, even in imagination, string that bow of
extraordinary stiffness.
"And (some amongst) those kings in exerting with swelling lips each
according to his strength, education, skill, and energy,--to string that
bow, were tossed on the ground and lay perfectly motionless for some
time. Their strength spent and their crowns and garlands loosened from
their persons, they began to pant for breath and their ambition of
winning that fair maiden was cooled. Tossed by that tough bow, and their
garlands and bracelets and other ornaments disordered, they began to
utter exclamations of woe. And that assemblage of monarchs, their hope of
obtaining Krishna gone, looked sad and woeful. And beholding the plight
of those monarchs, Karna that foremost of all wielders of the bow went to
where the bow was, and quickly raising it strung it and placed the arrows
on the string. And beholding the son of Surya--Karna of the Suta
tribe--like unto fire, or Soma, or Surya himself, resolved to shoot the
mark, those foremost of bowmen--the sons of Pandu--regarded the mark as
already shot and brought down upon the ground. But seeing Karna, Draupadi
loudly said, 'I will not select a Suta for my lord.' Then Karna, laughing
in vexation and casting glance at the Sun, threw aside the bow already
drawn to a circle.
Then when all those Kshatriyas gave up the task, the heroic king of the
Chedis--mighty as Yama (Pluto) himself--the illustrious and determined
Sisupala, the son of Damaghosa, in endeavouring to string the bow,
himself fell upon his knees on the ground. Then king Jarasandha endued
with great strength and powers, approaching the bow stood there for some
moment, fixed and motionless like a mountain. Tossed by the bow, he too
fell upon his knees on the ground, and rising up, the monarch left the
amphitheatre for (returning to) his kingdom. Then the great hero Salya,
the king of Madra, endued with great strength, in endeavouring to string
the bow fell upon his knees on the ground. At last when in that
assemblage consisting of highly respectable people, all the monarchs had
become subjects of derisive talk that foremost of heroes--Jishnu, the son
of Kunti--desired to string the bow and placed the arrows on the
bow-string.'"
