SECTION LX
"Yudhishthira said, 'Unto which of two Brahmanas, when both happen to be
equally pure in behaviour, equally possessed of learning and purity, of
birth and blood, but differing from each other in only this, viz., the
one solicits and the other does not,--I ask, O grandsire, unto which of
these two would a gift be more meritorious?"
"Bhishma said, 'It has been said. O son of Pritha, that a gift made unto
an unsoliciting person is productive of greater merit than one made to a
person who solicits. One possessed of contentment is certainly more
deserving than that person who is destitute of that virtue and is,
therefore, helpless amidst the storms and buffets of the world. The
firmness of a Kshatriya consists in the protection he gives to others.
The firmness of a Brahmana consists in his refusal to solicit. The
Brahmana possessed of steadiness and learning and contentment gladdens
the deities. The wise have said that an act of solicitation on the part
of a poor man is a great reproach. Those persons that solicit others are
said to annoy the world like thieves and robbers.[323] The person who
solicits is said to meet with death. The giver, however, is said not to
meet with death. The giver is said to grant life unto him who solicits.
By an act of gift, O Yudhishthira, the giver is said to rescue his own
self also. Compassion is a very high virtue. Let people make gift from
compassion unto those that solicit. Those, however, that do not beg, but
are plunged into poverty and distress should be respectfully invited to
receive assistance. If such Brahmanas, who must be regarded as the
foremost of their order, live in thy kingdom, thou shouldst regard them
as fire covered with ashes. Blazing with penances, they are capable of
consuming the whole earth. Such persons, O son of Kuru's race, though not
generally worshipped, should still be regarded as deserving of worship in
every way. Endued with knowledge and spiritual vision and penances and
Yoga, such persons always deserve our worship. O scorcher of foes, do
thou always offer worship unto such Brahmanas. One should repair of one's
own accord unto those foremost of Brahmanas that do not solicit anybody
and make unto them gifts of diverse kinds of wealth in abundance. The
merit that flows from properly pouring libations into the sacred fire
every morning and evening is won by the person who makes gifts unto a
Brahmana endued with learning, with the Vedas and with high and excellent
vows. Thou shouldst, O son of Kunti, invite those foremost of Brahmanas
who are cleansed by learning and the Vedas and vows, who live in
independence, whose Vedic studies and penances are hidden without being
proclaimed from the house-top, and who are observant of excellent vows,
and honour them with gifts of well-constructed and delightful houses
equipped with servitors and robes and furniture, and with all other
articles of pleasure and enjoyment. Conversant with all duties and
possessed of minute vision, those foremost of Brahmanas, O Yudhishthira,
may accept the gifts offered to them with devotion and respect, thinking
that they should not refuse and disappoint the giver. Thou shouldst
invite those Brahmanas whose wives wait for their return like tillers in
expectation of rain. Having fed them well thou shouldst make gifts of
additional food unto them so that upon their return home their expectant
wives might be able to distribute that food among their children that had
clamoured for food but that had been pacified with promises Brahmacharins
of restrained senses, O son, by eating at one's house in the forenoon,
cause the three sacrificial fires to be gratified with the householder at
whose house they eat. Let the sacrifice of gift proceed in thy house at
midday, O son, and do thou also give away kine and gold and robes (unto
thy guests after feeding them well). By conducting thyself, in this way,
thou art sure to gratify the chief of the celestials himself. That would
constitute thy third sacrifice, O Yudhishthira, in which offerings are
made unto the deities, the Pitris, and the Brahmanas. By such sacrifice
thou art sure to gratify the Viswedevas. Let compassion unto all
creatures, giving unto all creatures what is due unto them, restraining
the senses, renunciation, steadiness, and truth, constitute the final
bath of that sacrifice which is constituted by gift. Even this is the
sacrifice that is spread out for thee,--a sacrifice that is sanctified by
devotion and faith, and that has a large Dakshina attached to it. This
sacrifice which is constituted by gift is distinguished above all other
sacrifices, O son, let this sacrifice be always performed by thee.'"
