62
Sanjaya said, "All those kings, possessed of arms that resembled spiked
bludgeons, then proceeded towards their tents, filled with joy and
blowing their conchs on their way. The Pandavas also, O monarch,
proceeded towards our encampment. The great bowman Yuyutsu followed them,
as also Satyaki, and Dhrishtadyumna, and Shikhandi, and the five sons of
Draupadi. The other great bowmen also proceeded towards our tents. The
Parthas then entered the tent of Duryodhana, shorn of its splendours and
reft of its lord and looking like an arena of amusement after it has been
deserted by spectators. Indeed, that pavilion looked like a city reft of
festivities, or a lake without its elephant. It then swarmed with women
and eunuchs and certain aged counsellors. Duryodhana and other heroes,
attired in robes dyed in yellow, formerly used, O king, to wait
reverentially, with joined hands, on those old counsellors.
Arrived at the pavilion of the Kuru king, the Pandavas, those foremost of
car-warriors, O monarch, dismounted from their cars. At that time, always
engaged, O bull of Bharata's race, in the good of his friend, Keshava,
addressed the wielder of gandiva, saying, "Take down thy gandiva as also
the two inexhaustible quivers. I shall dismount after thee, O best of the
Bharatas! Get thee down, for this is for thy good, O sinless one!"
Pandu's brave son Dhananjaya did as he was directed. The intelligent
Krishna, abandoning the reins of the steeds, then dismounted from the car
of Dhananjaya. After the high-souled Lord of all creatures had dismounted
from that car, the celestial Ape that topped the mantle of Arjuna's
vehicle, disappeared there and then. The top of the vehicle, which had
before been burnt by Drona and Karna with their celestial weapons,
quickly blazed forth to ashes, O king, without any visible fire having
been in sight. Indeed, the car of Dhananjaya, with its quick pairs of
steeds, yoke, and shaft, fell down, reduced to ashes.
Beholding the vehicle thus reduced to ashes, O lord, the sons of Pandu
became filled with wonder, and Arjuna, O king, having saluted Krishna and
bowed unto him, said these words, with joined hands and in an
affectionate voice, 'O Govinda, O divine one, for what reason hath this
car been consumed by fire? What is this highly wonderful incident that
has happened before our eyes! O thou of mighty arms, if thou thinkest
that I can listen to it without harm, then tell me everything.'
Vasudeva said, 'That car, O Arjuna, had before been consumed by diverse
kinds of weapons. It was because I had sat upon it during battle that it
did not fall into pieces, O scorcher of foes! Previously consumed by the
energy of brahmastra, it has been reduced to ashes upon my abandoning it
after attainment by thee of thy objects!'
Then, with a little pride, that slayer of foes, the divine Keshava,
embracing king Yudhishthira, said unto him, 'By good luck, thou hast won
the victory, O son of Kunti! By good luck, thy foes have been vanquished!
By good luck, the wielder of gandiva, Bhimasena the son of Pandu,
thyself, O king, and the two sons of Madri have escaped with life from
this battle so destructive of heroes, and have escaped after having slain
all your foes! Quickly do that, O Bharata, which should now be done by
thee!
After I had arrived at Upaplavya, thyself, approaching me, with the
wielder of gandiva in thy company, gavest me honey and the customary
ingredients, and saidst these words, O Lord: 'This Dhananjaya, O Krishna,
is thy brother and friend! He should, therefore, be protected by thee in
all dangers!' After thou didst say these words, I answered thee, saying,
'So be it!'
That Savyasaci hath been protected by me. Victory also hath been thine, O
king! With his brothers, O king of kings, that hero of true prowess hath
come out of this dreadful battle, so destructive of heroes, with life!'
Thus addressed by Krishna, King Yudhishthira the just, with hair standing
on end, O monarch, said these words unto Janardana:
Yudhishthira said, "Who else save thee, O grinder of foes, not excepting
the thunder-wielding Purandara himself, could have withstood the
brahmastras hurled by Drona and Karna! It was through thy grace that the
samsaptakas were vanquished! It was through thy grace that Partha had
never to turn back from even the fiercest of encounters! Similarly, it
was through thy grace, O mighty-armed one, that I myself, with my
posterity, have, by accomplishing diverse acts one after another,
obtained the auspicious end of prowess and energy! At Upaplavya, the
great rishi Krishna-Dvaipayana told me that thither is Krishna where
righteousness is, and thither is victory where Krishna is!'"
Sanjaya continued, "After this conversation, those heroes entered thy
encampment and obtained the military chest, many jewels, and much wealth.
And they also obtained silver and gold and gems and pearls and many
costly ornaments and blankets and skins, and innumerable slaves male and
female, and many other things necessary for sovereignty. Having obtained
that inexhaustible wealth belonging to thee, O bull of Bharata's race,
those highly blessed ones, whose foe had been slain, uttered loud cries
of exultation. Having unyoked their animals, the Pandavas and Satyaki
remained there awhile for resting themselves.
Then Vasudeva of great renown said, 'We should, as an initiatory act of
blessedness, remain out of the camp for this night.' Answering, 'So be
it!' the Pandavas and Satyaki, accompanied by Vasudeva, went out of the
camp for the sake of doing that which was regarded as an auspicious act.
Arrived on the banks of the sacred stream Oghavati, O king, the Pandavas,
reft of foes, took up their quarters there for that night!
They despatched Keshava of Yadu's race to Hastinapura. Vasudeva of great
prowess, causing Daruka to get upon his car, proceeded very quickly to
that place where the royal son of Ambika was. While about to start on his
car having Shaibya and Sugriva (and the others) yoked unto it, (the
Pandavas) said unto him, 'Comfort the helpless Gandhari who hath lost all
her sons!' Thus addressed by the Pandavas, that chief of the Satvatas
then proceeded towards Hastinapura and arrived at the presence of
Gandhari who had lost all her sons in the war.'"
