SECTION L
"Yudhishthira said, 'What is the nature of the compassion or pity that is
felt at the sight of another's woe? What is the nature of that compassion
or sympathy that one feels for another in consequence of one's living in
the companionship of that other? What is the nature (and degree) of the
high blessedness that attaches to kine? It behoveth thee, O grandsire, to
expound all this to me.'
"Bhishma said, 'I shall, in this connection, O thou of great effulgence,
recite to thee an ancient narrative of a conversation between Nahusha and
the Rishi Chyavana. In days of yore O Chief of Bharata's race, the great
Rishi Chyavana of Bhrigu's race, always observant of high vows, became
desirous of leading for some time the mode of life called Udavasa and set
himself to commence it. Casting off pride and wrath and joy and grief,
the ascetic, pledging himself to observe that vow, set himself to live
for twelve years according to the rules of Udavasa. The Rishi inspired
all creatures with a happy trust. And he inspired similar confidence in
all creatures living in water. The puissant ascetic resembled the Moon
himself in his behaviour to all. Bowing unto all the deities and having
cleansed himself of all sins, he entered the water at the confluence of
the Ganga and the Yamuna, and stood there like an inanimate post of wood.
Placing his head against it, he bore the fierce and roaring current of
the two streams united together,--the current whose speed resembled that
of the wind itself. The Ganga and the Yamuna, however, and the other
streams and lakes, whose waters unite together at the confluence at
Prayaga, instead of afflicting the Rishi, went past him (to show him
respect). Assuming the attitude of a wooden post, the great Muni
sometimes laid himself down in the water and slept at ease. And
sometimes, O chief of Bharata's race, the intelligent sage stood in an
erect posture. He became quite agreeable unto all creatures living in
water. Without the least fear, all these used to smell the Rishi's lips.
In this way, the Rishi passed a long time at that grand confluence of
waters. One day some fishermen came there. With nets in their hands, O
thou of great effulgence, those men came to that spot where the Rishi
was. They were many in number and all of them were bent upon catching
fish. Well-formed and broad-chested, endued with great strength and
courage and never returning in fear from water, those men who lived upon
the earnings by their nets, came to that spot, resolved to catch fish.
Arrived at the water which contained many fish, those fishermen, O chief
of the Bharatas, tied all their nets together. Desirous of fish, those
Kaivartas, many in number united together and surrounded a portion of the
waters of the Ganga and the Yamuna with their nets. Indeed, they then
cast into water their net which was made of new strings, capable of
covering a large space, and endued with sufficient length and breadth.
All of them, getting into the water, then began to drag with great force
that net of theirs which was very large and had been well-spread over a
large space. All of them were free from fear, cheerful, and fully
resolved to do one another's bidding. They had succeeded in enmeshing a
large number of fish and other aquatic animals. And as they dragged their
net, O king, they easily dragged up Chyavana the son of Bhrigu along with
a large number of fish. His body was overgrown with the river moss. His
beard and matted locks had become green. And all over his person could be
seen conchs and other molluscs attached with their heads. Beholding that
Rishi who was well-conversant with the Vedas dragged up by them from
water, all the fishermen stood with joined palms and then prostrated
themselves on the ground and repeatedly bent their heads. Through fear
and pain caused by the dragging of the net, and in consequence of their
being brought upon land, the fish enmeshed in the net yielded up their
lives. The ascetic, beholding that great slaughter of fishes, became
filled with compassion and sighed repeatedly.'
"The fishermen said, 'We have committed this sin (of dragging thy sacred
self from water) through ignorance. Be gratified with us! What wish of
thine shall we accomplish? Command us, O great ascetic!'
"Bhishma continued, 'This addressed by them, Chyauana, from among that
heap of fishes around him, said, 'Do ye with concentrated attention hear
what my most cherished wish is. I shall either die with these fishes or
do ye sell me with them. I have lived with them for a long time within
the water. I do not wish to abandon them at such a time.' When he said
these words unto them, the fishermen became exceedingly terrified. With
pale faces they repaired to king Nahusha and informed him of all that had
taken place.'"
