
SECTION CLXXXIII
"The Gandharva continued, 'The Brahmana sage (Parasara) thus addressed by
the illustrious Vasishtha restrained his wrath from destroying the
worlds. But the Rishi Parasara endued with great energy--the son of
Saktri--the foremost of all persons acquainted with the Vedas--performed
a grand Rakshasa sacrifice. And remembering the slaughter of (his father)
Saktri, the great Muni began to consume the Rakshasas, young and old, in
the sacrifice he performed. And Vasishtha did not restrain him from this
slaughter of the Rakshasa, from the determination of not obstructing this
second vow (of his grandson). And in that sacrifice the great Muni
Parasara sat before three blazing fires, himself like unto a fourth fire.
And the son of Saktri, like the Sun just emerging from the clouds,
illuminated the whole firmament by that stainless sacrifice of his into
which large were the libations poured of clarified butter. Then Vasishtha
and the other Rishis regarded that Muni blazing with his own energy as if
he were the second Sun. Then the great Rishi Atri of liberal soul
desirous of ending that sacrifice, an achievement highly difficult for
others,--came to that place. And there also came, O thou slayer of all
foes, Pulastya and Pulaha, and Kratu the performer of many great
sacrifices, all influenced by the desire of saving the Rakshasas. And, O
thou bull of the Bharata race, Pulastya then, seeing that many Rakshasas
had already been slain, told these words unto Parasara that oppressor of
all enemies:
'There is no obstruction, I hope, to this sacrifice of thine, O child!
Takest thou any pleasure, O child, in this slaughter of even all those
innocent Rakshasas that know nothing of thy father's death. It behoveth
thee not to destroy any creatures thus. This, O child, is not the
occupation of a Brahmana devoted to asceticism. Peace is the highest
virtue. Therefore, O Parasara, establish thou peace. How hast thou, O
Parasara, being so superior, engaged thyself in such a sinful practice?
It behoveth not thee to transgress against Saktri himself who was
well-acquainted with all rules of morality. It behoveth not thee to
extirpate any creatures. O descendant of Vasishtha's race, that which
befell thy father was brought about by his own curse. It was for his own
fault that Saktri was taken hence unto heaven. O Muni, no Rakshasa was
capable of devouring Saktri; he himself provided for his own death. And,
O Parasara, Viswamitra was only a blind instrument in that matter. Both
Saktri and Kalmashapada, having ascended to heaven are enjoying great
happiness. And, the other sons also of the great Rishi Vasishtha who were
younger than Saktri, are even now enjoying themselves with the
celestials. And, O child, O offspring of Vasishtha's son, thou hast also
been, in this sacrifice, only an instrument in the destruction of these
innocent Rakshasas. O, blest be thou! Abandon this sacrifice of thine.
Let it come to an end.'
"The Gandharva continued, 'Thus addressed by Pulastya, as also by the
intelligent Vasishtha, that mighty Muni--the son of Saktri then brought
that sacrifice to an end. And the Rishi cast the fire that he had ignited
for the purpose of the Rakshasas' sacrifice into the deep woods on the
north of the Himavat. And that fire may be seen to this day consuming
Rakshasas and trees and stones in all seasons.'"
