SECTION XLVIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Through inducements offered by wealth, or through
mere lust, or through ignorance of the true order of birth (of both males
and females), or through folly, intermixture happens of the several order
What, O grandsire, are the duties of persons that are born in the mixed
classes and what are the acts laid down for them? Do thou discourse to me
on this!'
"Bhishma said, 'In the beginning, the Lord of all creatures created the
four orders and laid down their respective acts or duties, for the sake
of sacrifice.[298] The Brahmana may take four wives, one from each of the
four orders. In two of them (viz., the wife taken from his own order and
that taken from the one next below), he takes birth himself (the children
begotten upon them being regarded as invested with the same status as his
own). Those sons, however, that are begotten by him on the two spouses
that belong to the next two orders (viz., Vaisya and Sudra), are
inferior, their status being determined not by that of their father but
by that of their mothers. The son that is begotten by a Brahmana upon a
Sudra wife is called Parasara, implying one born of a corpse, for the
Sudra woman's body is as inauspicious as a corpse. He should serve the
persons of his (father's) race. Indeed, it is not proper for him to give
up the duty of service that has been laid down for him. Adopting all
means in his power, he should uphold the burden of his family. Even if he
happens to be elder in age, he should still dutifully serve the other
children of his father who may be younger to him in years, and bestow
upon them whatever he may succeed in earning. A Kshatriya may take three
wives. In two of them (viz., the one taken from his own order and the
other that is taken from the order immediately below), he takes birth
himself (so that those children are invested with the status of his own
order). His third wife being of the Sudra order is regarded as very
inferior. The son that he begets upon her comes to be called as an Ugra.
The Vaisya may take two spouses. In both of them (viz., the one taken
from his own order, and the other from the lowest of the four pure
orders), he takes birth himself (so that those children become invested
with the status of his own order). The Sudra can take only one wife,
viz., she that is taken from his own order. The son begotten by him upon
her becomes a Sudra. A son that takes birth under circumstances other
than those mentioned above, comes to be looked upon as a very inferior
one If a person of a lower order begets a son upon a woman of a superior
order, such a son is regarded as outside the pale of the four pure
orders. Indeed, such a son becomes on object of censure with the four
principal orders. If a Kshatriya begets a son upon a Brahmana woman, such
a son, without being included in any of the four pure orders, comes to be
regarded as a Suta The duties of a Suta are all connected with the
reciting of eulogies and encomiums of kings and other great men. The son
begotten by a Vaisya upon a woman of the Brahmana order comes to be
regarded as a Vaidehaka. The duties assigned to him are the charge of
bars and bolts for protecting the privacy of women of respectable
households. Such sons have no cleansing rites laid down for them.[299] If
a Sudra unites with a woman belonging to the foremost of the four orders,
the son that is begotten is called a Chandala. Endued with a fierce
disposition, he must live in the outskirts of cities and towns and the
duty assigned to him is that of the public executioner. Such sons are
always regarded as wretches of their race. These, O foremost of
intelligent persons, are the offspring of intermixed orders. The son
begotten by a Vaisya upon a Kshatriya woman becomes a Vandi or Magadha.
The duties assigned to him are eloquent recitations of praise. The son
begotten through transgression, by a Sudra upon a Kshatriya women,
becomes a Nishada and the duties assigned to him have reference to the
catching of fish. If a Sudra happens to have intercourse with a Vaisya
woman, the son begotten upon her comes to be called Ayogava. The duty
assigned to such a person are those of a Takshan (carpenter). They that
are Brahmanas should never accept gifts from such a person. They are not
entitled to possess any kind of wealth. Persons belonging to the mixed
castes beget upon spouses taken from their own castes children invested
with the status that is their own. When they beget children in women
taken from castes that are inferior to theirs, such children become
inferior to their fathers, for they become invested with the status that
belongs to their mothers Thus as regards the four pure orders, persons
beget children invested with their own status upon spouses taken from
their own orders as also upon them that are taken from the orders
immediately below their own. When, however, offspring are begotten upon
other spouses, they come to be regarded as invested with a status that
is, principally, outside the pale of the four pure orders. When such
children beget sons in women taken from their own classes, those sons
take the status of their sires. It is only when they take spouse from
castes other than their own, that the children they beget become invested
with inferior status. As an example of this it may be said that a Sudra
begets upon a woman belonging to the most superior order a son that is
outside the pale of the four orders (for such a son comes to be regarded
as a Chandala who is much inferior). The son that is outside the pale of
the four orders by uniting with women belonging to the four principal
orders, begets offspring that are further degraded in point of status.
From those outside the pale of the four orders and those again that are
further outside that pale, children multiply in consequence of the union
of persons with women of classes superior to their own. In this way, from
persons of inferior status classes spring up, altogether fifteen in
number, that are equally low or still lower in status. It is only from
sexual union of women with persons who should not have such union with
them that mixed classes spring up. Among the classes that are thus
outside the pale of the four principal or pure orders, children are
begotten upon women belonging to the class called Sairindhri by men of
the class called Magadha. The occupation of such offspring is the
adornment of the bodies of kinds and others. They are well-acquainted
with the preparation of unguents, the making of wreaths, and the
manufacture of articles used for the decoration of the person. Though
free by the status that attaches to them by birth, they should yet lead a
life of service. From the union of Magadhas of a certain class with women
of the caste called Sairindhri, there springs up another caste called
Ayogava. Their occupation consists in the making of nets (for catching
fish and fowl and animals of the chase). Vaidehas, by uniting themselves
with women of the Sairindhri caste, beget children called Maireyakas
whose occupation consists in the manufacture of wines and spirits. From
the Nishadas spring a caste called Madgura and another known by the name
of Dasas whose occupation consists in plying boats. From the Chandala
springs a race called Swapaka whose occupation consists in keeping guard
over the dead. The women of the Magadhi caste, by union with these four
castes of wicked dispositions produce four others who live by practising
deceit. These are Mansa, Swadukara, Kshaudra, and Saugandha. From the
Vaideha springs up a cruel and sinful caste that lives by practising
deception. From the Nishadas again springs up the Madranabha caste whose
members are seen to ride on cars drawn by asses. From the Chandalas
springs up the caste called Pukkasa whose members are seen to eat the
flesh of asses, horses and elephants. These cover themselves with the
garments obtained by stripping human corpses. They are again seen to eat
from broken earthenware[300]. These three castes of very low status are
born of women of the Ayogava caste (by fathers taken from different
castes). The caste called Kshudra springs from the Vaidehaka. The caste
called Andhra which takes up its residence in the outskirts of towns and
cities, also springs up (from the Vaidehakas). Then again the Charmakara,
uniting himself with a woman of Nishada caste, begets the class called
Karavara. From the Chandala again springs up the caste known by the name
of Pandusaupaka whose occupation consists in making baskets and other
things with cleft bamboos. From the union of the Nishada with a woman of
the Vaidehi caste springs one who is called by the name of Ahindaka. The
Chandala begets upon a Saupaka woman, a son that does not differ from the
Chandala in status or occupation. A Nishada woman, by union with a
Chandala, brings forth a son who lives in the outskirts of villages and
towns. Indeed, the members of such a caste live in crematoria and are
regarded by the very lowest orders as incapable of being numbered among
them. Thus to these mixed castes spring up from improper and sinful union
of fathers and mothers belonging to different castes. Whether they live
in concealment or openly, they should be known by their occupations. The
duties have been laid down in the scriptures for only the four principal
orders. As regards the others the scriptures are entirely silent. Among
all the orders, the members of those castes that have no duties assigned
to them by the scriptures, need have no fears as to what they do (to earn
their livelihood). Persons unaccustomed to the performance or for whom
sacrifices have not been laid down, and who are deprived of the company
and the instructions of the righteous whether numbered among the four
principal orders or out of their pale, by uniting themselves with women
of other castes, led not by considerations of righteousness but by
uncontrolled lust, cause numerous mixed castes to come into existence
whose occupations and abodes depend on the circumstances connected with
the irregular unions to which they owe their origin. Having recourse to
spots where four roads meet, or crematoria, or hills and mountains, or
forests and trees, they build their habitations there. The ornaments they
wear are made of iron. Living in such places openly, they betake
themselves to their own occupations to earn their livelihood. They may be
seen to live in this way, adorning their persons with ornaments and
employed in the task of manufacturing diverse kinds of domestic and other
utensils. Without doubt, by assisting kine and Brahmanas, and practising
the virtues of abstention from cruelty, compassion, truthfulness of
speech, and forgiveness, and, if need be, by preserving others by laying
down their very lives, persons of the mixed castes may achieve success. I
have no doubt, O chief of men, that these virtues become the causes of
their success. He that is possessed of intelligence, should, taking
everything into consideration, beget offspring according to the
ordinances of the scriptures, upon woman that have been declared proper
or fit for him. A son begotten upon a women belonging to a degraded
caste, instead of rescuing the sire, brings him to grief even as a heavy
weight brings to grief a swimmer desirous of crossing water. Whether a
man happens to be possessed of learning or not, lust and wrath are
natural attributes of humanity in this world. Women, therefore, may
always be seen to drag men into the wrong path. This natural disposition
of women is such that man's contact with her is productive of misery to
him. Hence, men possessed of wisdom do not suffer themselves to be
excessively attached to women.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'There are men who belong to the mixed castes, and
who are of very impure birth. Though presenting the features of
respectability, they are in reality disrespectable. In consequence of
these external aspects we may not be able to know the truth about their
birth. Are there any signs, O grandsire, by which the truth may be known
about the origin of such men?"
