
SECTION CLXXXIV
"Arjuna asked, 'What for, O Gandharva, did king Kalmashapada command his
queen to go unto that foremost of all persons conversant with the
Vedas--the master Vasishtha? Why also did that illustrious and great
Rishi Vasishtha himself who was acquainted with every rule of morality
know a woman he should not have known? O friend, was this an act of sin
on the part of Vasishtha? It behoveth thee to remove the doubts I
entertain and refer to thee for solution.'
"The Gandharva replied, saying, 'O irrepressible Dhananjaya, listen to me
as I answer the question thou hast asked in respect of Vasishtha and king
Kalmashapada that cherisher of friends. O thou best of the Bharatas, I
have told thee all about the curse of king Kalmashapada by Saktri, the
illustrious son of Vasishtha. Brought under the influence of the curse,
that smiter of all foes--king Kalmashapada--with eyes whirling in anger
went out of his capital accompanied by his wife. And entering with his
wife the solitary woods the king began to wander about. And one day while
the king under the influence of the curse was wandering through that
forest abounding in several kinds of deer and various other animals and
overgrown with numerous large trees and shrubs and creepers and
resounding with terrible cries, he became exceedingly hungry. And the
monarch thereupon began to search for some food. Pinched with hunger, the
king at last saw, in a very solitary part of the woods, a Brahmana and
his wife enjoying each other. Alarmed at beholding the monarch the couple
ran away, their desire ungratified. Pursuing the retreating pair, the
king forcibly seized the Brahmana. Then the Brahmani, beholding her lord
seized, addressed the monarch, saying, 'Listen to what I say, O monarch
of excellent vows! It is known all over the world that thou art born in
the solar race, and that thou art ever vigilant in the practice of
morality and devoted to the service of thy superiors. It behoveth thee
not to commit sin, O thou irrepressible one, deprived though thou hast
been of thy senses by (the Rishi's) curse. My season hath come, and
wishful of my husband's company I was connected with him. I have not been
gratified yet. Be propitious unto us, O thou best of kings! Liberate my
husband.' The monarch, however, without listening to her cries cruelly
devoured her husband like a tiger devouring its desirable prey. Possessed
with wrath at this sight, the tears that that woman shed blazed up like
fire and consumed everything in that place. Afflicted with grief at the
calamity that overtook her lord, the Brahmani in anger cursed the royal
sage Kalmashapada, 'Vile wretch, since thou hast today cruelly devoured
under my very nose my illustrious husband dear unto me, even before my
desires have been gratified, therefore shall thou, O wicked one afflicted
by my curse, meet with instant death when thou goest in for thy wife in
season. And thy wife, O wretch, shall bring forth a son uniting herself
with that Rishi Vasishtha whose children have been devoured by thee. And
that child, O worst of kings, shall be the perpetuator of thy race.' And
cursing the monarch thus, that lady of Angira's house bearing every
auspicious mark, entered the blazing fire in the very sight of the
monarch. And, O thou oppressor of all foes, the illustrious and exalted
Vasishtha by his ascetic power and spiritual insight immediately knew
all. And long after this, when the king became freed from his curse, he
approached his wife Madayanati when her season came. But Madayanati
softly sent him away. Under the influence of passion the monarch had no
recollection of that curse. Hearing, however, the words of his wife, the
best of kings became terribly alarmed. And recollecting the curse he
repented bitterly of what he had done. It was for this reason, O thou
best of men, that the monarch infected with the Brahmani's curse,
appointed Vasishtha to beget a son upon his queen.'"
