
SECTION CLXXXII
"The Gandharva said, 'Vasishtha after this, continued the narration
saying, 'Hearing these words of the Pitris, Aurva, O child, replied unto
them to this effect:
'Ye Pitris, the vow I have made from anger for the destruction of all the
worlds, must not go in vain. I cannot consent to be one whose anger and
vows are futile. Like fire consuming dry woods, this rage of mine will
certainly consume me if I do not accomplish my vow. The man that
represseth his wrath that hath been excited by (adequate) cause, becometh
incapable of duly compassing the three ends of life (viz., religion,
profit and pleasure). The wrath that kings desirous of subjugating the
whole earth exhibit, is not without its uses. It serveth to restrain the
wicked and to protect the honest. While lying unborn within my mother's
thigh, I heard the doleful cries of my mother and other women of the
Bhrigu race who were then being exterminated by the Kshatriyas. Ye
Pitris, when those wretches of Kshatriyas began to exterminate the
Bhrigus together with unborn children of their race, it was then that
wrath filled my soul. My mother and the other women of our race, each in
an advanced state of pregnancy, and my father, while terribly alarmed,
found not in all the worlds a single protector. Then when the Bhrigu
women found not a single protector, my mother held me in one of her
thighs. If there be a punisher of crimes in the worlds no one in all the
worlds would dare commit a crime; if he findeth not a punisher, the
number of sinners becometh large. The man who having the power to prevent
or punish sin doth not do so knowing that a sin hath been committed, is
himself defiled by that sin. When kings and others, capable of protecting
my fathers, protect them not, postponing that duty preferring the
pleasures of life, I have just cause to be enraged with them. I am the
lord of the creation, capable of punishing its iniquity. I am incapable
of obeying your command. Capable of punishing this crime, if I abstain
from so doing, men will once more have to undergo a similar persecution.
The fire of my wrath too that is ready to consume the worlds, if
repressed, will certainly consume by its own energy my own self. Ye
masters, I know that ye ever seek the good of the worlds: direct me,
therefore, as to what may benefit both myself and the worlds.'
"Vasishtha continued, 'The Pitris replied saying, O, throw this fire that
is born of thy wrath and that desireth to consume the worlds, into the
waters. That will do thee good. The worlds, indeed, are all dependent on
water (as their elementary cause). Every juicy substance containeth
water, indeed the whole universe is made of water. Therefore, O thou best
of Brahmanas, cast thou this fire of thy wrath into the waters. If,
therefore, thou desirest it, O Brahmana, let this fire born of thy wrath
abide in the great ocean, consuming the waters thereof, for it hath been
said that the worlds are made of water. In this way, O thou sinless one,
thy word will be rendered true, and the worlds with the gods will not be
destroyed.'
"Vasishtha continued, 'Then, O child, Aurva cast the fire of his wrath
into the abode of Varuna. And that fire which consumeth the waters of the
great ocean, became like unto a large horse's head which persons
conversant with the Vedas call by the name of Vadavamukha. And emitting
itself from that mouth it consumeth the waters of the mighty ocean. Blest
be thou! It behoveth not thee, therefore, to destroy the worlds. O thou
Parasara, who art acquainted with the higher regions, thou foremost of
wise men!'"
