
SECTION CLXXXVIII
"Dhrishtadyumna said, 'Duryodhana, Durvisaha, Durmukha and
Dushpradharshana, Vivinsati, Vikarna, Saha, and Duhsasana; Yuyutsu and
Vayuvega and Bhimavegarava; Ugrayudha, Valaki, Kanakayu, and Virochana,
Sukundala, Chitrasena, Suvarcha, and Kanakadhwaja; Nandaka, and Vahusali,
and Tuhunda, and Vikata; these, O sister, and many other mighty sons of
Dhritarashtra--all heroes--accompanied by Karna, have come for thy hand.
Innumerable other illustrious monarchs all bulls among Kshatriyas--have
also come for thee. Sakuni, Sauvala, Vrisaka, and Vrihadvala,--these sons
of the king Gandhara--have also come. Foremost of all wielders of
weapons--the illustrious Aswatthaman and Bhoja, adorned with every
ornament have also come for thee. Vrihanta, Manimana, Dandadhara,
Sahadeva, Jayatsena, Meghasandhi, Virata with his two sons Sankha and
Uttara, Vardhakshemi, Susarma, Senavindu, Suketu with his two sons Sunama
and Suvarcha, Suchitra, Sukumara, Vrika, Satyadhriti, Suryadhwaja,
Rochamana, Nila, Chitrayudha, Agsuman, Chekitana, the mighty Sreniman,
Chandrasena the mighty son of Samudrasena, Jarasandha, Vidanda, and
Danda--the father and son, Paundraka, Vasudeva, Bhagadatta endued with
great energy, Kalinga, Tamralipta, the king of Pattana, the mighty
car-warrior Salya, the king of Madra, with his son, the heroic
Rukmangada, Rukmaratha, Somadatta of the Kuru race with his three sons,
all mighty chariot-fighters and heroes, viz., Bhuri, Bhurisrava, and
Sala, Sudakshina, Kamvoja of the Puru race, Vrihadvala, Sushena, Sivi,
the son of Usinara, Patcharanihanta, the king of Karusha, Sankarshana
(Valadeva), Vasudeva (Krishna) the mighty son of Rukmini, Samva,
Charudeshna, the son of Pradyumna with Gada, Akrura, Satyaki, the
high-souled Uddhava, Kritavarman, the son of Hridika, Prithu, Viprithu,
Viduratha, Kanka, Sanku with Gaveshana, Asavaha, Aniruddha, Samika,
Sarimejaya, the heroic Vatapi Jhilli Pindaraka, the powerful Usinara, all
these of the Vrishni race, Bhagiratha, Vrihatkshatra, Jayadratha the son
of Sindhu, Vrihadratha, Valhika, the mighty charioteer Srutayu, Uluka,
Kaitava, Chitrangada and Suvangada, the highly intelligent Vatsaraja, the
king of Kosala, Sisupala and the powerful Jarasandha, these and many
other great kings--all Kshatriyas celebrated throughout the world--have
come, O blessed one, for thee. Endued with prowess, these will shoot the
mark. And thou shalt choose him for thy husband who amongst these will
shoot the mark.'"
