SECTION XI
"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, in what kind of man or woman,
O chief of the Bharatas, does the goddess of prosperity always reside?'
"Bhishma said, 'I shall, in this connection, narrate to thee what
occurred and what I have heard. Once on a time, beholding the goddess of
prosperity blazing with beauty and endued with the complexion of the
lotus, the princess Rukmini the mother of Pradyumna that bore the device
of the Makara on his banner, filled with curiosity, asked this question
in the presence of Devaki's son. Who are those beings by whose side thou
stayest and whom thou favours? Who again, are those whom thou dost not
bless with favour. O thou that art dear unto Him that is the lord of all
creatures, tell me this truly, O thou that art equal to a great Rishi in
penances and puissance. Thus addressed by the princess, the goddess of
prosperity, with a face as beautiful as the moon, and moved by grace, in
the presence of him who has Garuda on his banner, said these words in
reply that were sweet and charming.'
"Sree said, 'O blessed lady, I always reside with him that is eloquent,
active, attentive to business, free from wrath, given to the worship of
the deities, endued with gratitude, has his passions under complete
control, and is high-minded in everything. I never reside with one that
is inattentive to business, that is an unbeliever, that causes an
intermixture of races in consequence of his lustfulness, that is
ungrateful, that is of impure practices, that uses harsh and cruel words,
that is a thief, that cherishes malice towards his preceptors and other
seniors, those persons that are endued with little energy, strength,
life, and honour, that are distressed at every trifle, and that always
indulge in wrath. I never reside with these that think in one strain and
act in a different one.[28] I never reside also with him who never
desires any acquisition for himself, of him who is so blinded as to rest
content with the lot in which he finds himself without any exertion or
with those that are contented with small acquisitions. I reside with
those that are observant of the duties of their own order, or those that
are conversant with the duties of righteousness, or those that are
devoted to the service of the aged or those that have their passions
under control, or those that are endued with cleansed souls or those that
observe the virtue of forgiveness, or those that are able and prompt in
action, or with such women as are forgiving and self-restrained. I reside
with those women also that are devoted to truth and sincerity and that
worship the deities. I do not reside with those women also that do not
attend to household furniture and provisions scattered all around the
house, and that always utter words contrary to the wishes of their
husbands. I always avoid those women that are fond of the houses of other
people and that have no modesty. On the other hand, I reside with those
women that are devoted to their husbands, that are blessed in behaviour,
and that are always decked in ornaments and attired in good robes. I
always reside with those women that are truthful in speech, that are of
handsome and agreeable features, that are blessed and that are endued
with all accomplishments. I always avoid such women as are sinful and
unclean or impure, as always lick the corners of their mouths, as have no
patience or fortitude, and as are fond of dispute and quarrelling, as are
given to much sleep, and as always lie down. I always reside in
conveyances and the animals that drag them, in maidens, in ornaments and
good vestments, in sacrifices, in clouds charged with rain, in full-blown
lotuses, and in those stars that bespangle the autumnal firmament. I
reside in elephants, in the cow pen, in good seats, and in lakes adorned
with full-blown lotuses. I live also in such rivers as babble sweetly in
their course, melodious with the music of cranes, having banks adorned
with rows of diverse trees, and restored to by Brahmanas and ascetics and
others crowned with success. I always reside in those rivers also that
have deep and large volumes of rolling waters rendered turbid by lions
and elephants plunging into them for bathing or slaking their thirst. I
reside also in infuriate elephants, in bovine bulls, in kings, on the
throne and good men. I always reside in that house in which the inmate
pours libation on the sacrificial fire and worships kine, Brahmanas and
the deities. I reside in that house where at the proper time offerings
are made unto the deities, in course of worship.[29] I always reside in
such Brahmanas as are devoted to the study of the Vedas, in Kshatriyas
devoted to the observance of righteousness, in Vaisyas devoted to
cultivation, and the Sudras devoted to the (menial) service of the three
upper classes. I reside, with a heart firm and unchangeable, in Narayana,
in my embodied self. In Him is righteousness in its perfection and full
measure, devotion to the Brahmanas, and the quality of agreeableness. Can
I not say, O lady that I do not reside in my embodied form, (in any of
these places that I have mentioned, except Narayana)? That person in whom
I reside in spirit increases in righteousness and fame and wealth and
objects of desire.'"
