SECTION III
"Yudhishthira said, 'If, O prince, Brahmanahood be so difficult of
attainment by the three classes (Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras), how
then did the high souled Viswamitra, O king, though a Kshatriya (by
birth), attain to the status of a Brahmana? I desire to know this, O
sire. Therefore, do thou truly relate this matter to me. That powerful
man, O sire, by virtue of his austerities, destroyed in a moment the
hundred sons of the high-souled Vasishtha. While under the influence of
anger, he created numerous evil spirits and Rakshasas of mighty vigour
and resembling the great destroyer Kala himself. The great and learned
race of Kusika, numbering hundreds of regenerate sages and belauded by
the Brahmanas, was founded in this world of men by him. Sunasepha of
austere penances, the son of Richika, having been sought to be slain as
an animal in the great sacrifice of Amvarisha, obtained his deliverance
through Viswamitra. Harishchandra, having pleased the gods at a
sacrifice, became a son of the wise Viswamitra. For not having honoured
their eldest brother Devarat, whom Viswamitra got as a son from the gods,
the other fifty brothers of his were cursed, and all of them became
Chandalas. Trisanku, the son of Ikshwaku, through the curse of Vasistha
became a Chandala, and when abandoned by his friends, and remaining
suspended with his head downwards in the lower regions, was translated to
heaven at the pleasure of Viswamitra. Viswamitra had a large river, by
name Kausika, that was frequented by celestial Rishis. This sacred and
auspicious stream was frequented by the gods and regenerate Rishis. For
disturbing his devotions, the famous celestial nymph Rambha of fine
bracelets, was cursed and metamorphosed into a rock. Through fear of
Viswamitra the glorious Vasishtha, in olden times, binding himself with
creepers, threw himself down into a river and again rose released from
his bonds. In consequence of this, that large and sacred river become
thenceforth celebrated by the name of Vipasa.[3] He prayed to the
glorious and puissant Indra who was pleased with him and absolved him
from a curse.[4] Remaining on the northern side of the firmament, he
sheds his lustre from a position in the midst of the seven regenerate
Rishis,[5] and Dhruva the son of Uttanpada[6]. These are his achievements
as well as many others. O descendant of Kuru, as they were performed by a
Kshatriya, my curiosity has been roused in this matter. Therefore, O
foremost one of Bharata's race, do thou relate this matter to me truly.
How without casting off his corporeal frame and taking another tenement
of flesh could he become a Brahmana? Do thou, O sire, truly relate this
matter to me as thou hast related to me the story of Matanga. Matanga was
born as a Chandala,[7] and could not attain to Brahmanahood,(with all his
austerities) but how could this man attain to the status of a Brahmana?"
