SECTION LXXXI
"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, what is that which is the most
sacred of all sacred things in the world, other than that which has been
already mentioned, and which is the highest of all sanctifying objects.'
"Bhishma said, 'Kine are the foremost of all objects. They are highly
sacred and they rescue men (from all kinds of sin and distress). With
their milk and with the Havi manufactured therefrom, kine uphold all
creatures in the universe. O best of the Bharatas, there is nothing that
is more sacred than kine. The foremost of all things in the three worlds,
kine are themselves sacred and capable of cleansing others, Kine reside
in a region that is even higher than the region of the deities. When
given away, they rescue their givers. Men of wisdom succeed in attaining
to Heaven by making gifts of kine. Yuvanaswa's son Mandhatri, Yayati, and
(his sire) Nahusha, used always to give away kine in thousands. As the
reward of those gifts, they have attained to such regions as are
unattainable by the very deities. There is, in this connection, O sinless
one, a discourse delivered of old. I shall recite it to thee. Once on a
time, the intelligent Suka, having finished his morning rites, approached
with a restrained mind his sire, that foremost of Rishis, viz., the
Island-born Krishna, who is acquainted with the distinction between that
which is superior and that which is inferior, and saluting him, said,
'What is that sacrifice which appears to thee as the foremost of all
sacrifices? What is that act by doing which men of wisdom succeed in
attaining to the highest region? What is that sacred act by which the
deities enjoy the felicity of Heaven? What constitutes the character of
sacrifice as sacrifice? What is that upon which sacrifice rests? What is
that which is regarded as the best by the deities? What is that sacrifice
which transcends the sacrifices of this world? Do thou also tell me, O
sire, what is that which is the most sacred of all things. Having heard
these words of his son, O chief of Bharata's race, Vyasa, the foremost of
all persons conversant with duties, discoursed as follows unto him.'
"Vyasa said, 'Kine constitute the stay of all creatures. Kine are the
refuge of all creatures. Kine are the embodiment of merit. Kine are
sacred, and kine are sanctifiers of all. Formerly kine were hornless as
it has been heard by us. For obtaining horns they adored the eternal and
puissant Brahmana. The puissant, Brahmana, seeing the kine paying their
adorations to him and sitting in praya, granted unto each of them what
each desired. Thereafter their horns grew and each got what each desired.
Of diverse colours, and endued with horns, they began to shine in beauty,
O son! Favoured by Brahman himself with boons, kine are auspicious and
yielders of Havya and Kavya. They are the embodiments of merit. They are
sacred and blessed. They are possessed of excellent form and attributes.
Kine constitute high and highly excellent energy. The gift of kine is
very much applauded. Those good men who, freed from pride, make gifts of
kine, are regarded as doers of righteous deeds and as givers of all
articles. Such men, O sinless one, attain to the highly sacred region of
kine. The trees there produce sweet fruits. Indeed, those trees are
always adorned with excellent flowers and fruits. Those flowers, O best
of regenerate persons, are endued with celestial fragrance. The entire
soil of that region is made of gems. The sands there are all gold. The
climate there is such that the excellencies of every season are felt.
There is no more mire, no dust. It is, indeed, highly auspicious. The
streams that run there shine in resplendence for the red lotuses blooming
upon their bosoms, and for the jewels and gems and gold that occur in
their banks and that display the effulgence of the morning Sun. There are
many lakes also in that region on whose breasts are many lotuses, mixed
here and there with Nymphoea stellata, and having their petals made of
costly gems, and their filaments adorned with a complexion like that of
gold. They are also adorned with flowering forests of the Nerium odorum
with thousands of beautiful creepers twining round them, as also with
forests of Santanakas bearing their flowery burdens. There are rivers
whose banks are variegated with many bright pearls and resplendent gems
and shining gold. Portions of those regions are covered with excellent
trees that are decked with jewels and gems of every kind. Some of them
are made of gold and some display the splendour of fire. There stand many
mountains made of gold, and many hills and eminences made of jewels and
gems. These shine in beauty in consequence of their tall summits which
are composed of all kinds of gems. The trees that adorn those regions
always put forth flowers and fruits, and are always covered with dense
foliage. The flowers always emit a celestial fragrance and the fruits are
exceedingly sweet, O chief of Bharata's race. Those persons that are of
righteous deeds, O Yudhishthira, always sport there in joy. Freed from
grief and wrath, they pass their time there, crowned with the fruition of
every wish. Persons of righteous deeds, possessed of fame, sport there in
happiness, moving from place to place, O Bharata, on delightful vehicles
of great beauty. Auspicious deed, bands of Apsaras always amuse them
there, with music and dance. Indeed O Yudhishthira, a person goes to such
regions as the reward of his making gifts of kine. Those regions which
have for their lords Pushan, and the Maruts of great puissance, are
attained to by givers of kine. In affluence the royal Varuna is regarded
as pre-eminent. The giver of kine attains to affluence like that of
Varuna himself. One should, with the steadiness of a vow, daily recite
these Mantras declared by Prajapati himself (in respect of kine).
Viswarupa and viz.,--Yugandharah, Surupah, Vahurupah, and
Matara.[379]--He who serves kine with reverence and who follows them with
humility, succeeds in obtaining many invaluable boons from kine who
become gratified with him. One should never, in even one's heart, do an
injury to kine. One should, indeed, always confer happiness on them. One
should, always reverence kine and worship them, with bends of one's head.
He who does this, restraining his senses the while and filled with
cheerfulness, succeeds in attaining to that felicity which is enjoyed by
kine (and which kine alone can confer). One should for three days drink
the hot urine of the cow. For the next three days one should drink the
hot milk of the cow. Having thus drunk for three days hot milk, one
should next drink hot ghee for three days. Having in this way drunk hot
ghee for three days, one should subsist for the next three days on air
only. That sacred thing by whose aid the deities enjoy regions of
felicity, that which is the most sacred of all sacred things, viz., ghee
should then be borne on the head.[380] With the aid of ghee one should
pour libations on the sacred fire. By making gifts of ghee, one should
cause the Brahman to utter benedictions on oneself. One should eat ghee
and make gifts of ghee. As the reward of this conduct, one may then
attain to that prosperity which belongs to kine. That man who, for a
month, subsists upon the gruel of barley picked up every day from cow
dung becomes cleansed of sins as grave as the slaughter of a Brahman.
After their defeat at the hands of the Daityas, the deities practised
this expiation. It was in consequence of this expiation that they
succeeded in regaining their position as deities. Verily, it was through
this that they regained their strength and became crowned with success.
Kine are sacred. They are embodiments of merit. They are high and most
efficacious cleansers of all. By making gifts of kine unto the Brahmanas
one attains to Heaven. Living in a pure state, in the midst of kine, one
should mentally recite those sacred Mantras that are known by the name of
Gomati, after touching pure water. By doing this, one becomes purified
and cleansed (of all sins). Brahmanas of righteous deeds, who have been
cleansed by knowledge, study of the Vedas, and observance of vows,
should, only in the midst of sacred fires or kine or assemblies of
Brahmanas, impart unto their disciples a knowledge of the Gomati Mantras
which are every way like unto a sacrifice (for the merit they produce).
One should observe a fast for three nights for receiving the boon
constituted by a knowledge of the import of the Gomati Mantras. The man
who is desirous of obtaining a son may obtain one by adoring these
Mantras. He who desires the possession of wealth may have his desire
gratified by adoring these Mantras. The girl desirous of having a good
husband may have her wish fulfilled by the same means. In fact, one may
acquire the fruition of every wish one may cherish, by adoring these
sacred Mantras. When kine are gratified with the service one renders
them, they are, without doubt, capable of granting the fruition of every
wish. Even so, kine are highly blessed. They are the essential requisites
of sacrifices. They are grantors of every wish. Know that there is
nothing superior to kine.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by his high-souled sire, Suka, endued
with great energy, began from that time to worship kine every day. Do
thou also, O son, conduct thyself in the same way.'"
