SECTION LVI
"Chyavana said, 'I should certainly, O chief of men, tell you everything
about the circumstance for which, O monarch, I came hither for
exterminating thy race. This is well-known, O king, that the Kshatriyas
should always have the assistance of the sons of Bhrigu in the matter of
sacrifices. Through an irresistible decree of Destiny, the Kshatriyas and
the Bhargavas will fall out. The Kshatriyas, O king, will slay the
descendants of Bhrigu. Afflicted by an ordinance of fate, they will
exterminate the race of Bhrigu, not sparing even infants in their
mothers' wombs. There will then spring in Bhrigu's race a Rishi of the
name of Urva. Endued with great energy, he will in splendour certainly
resemble fire or the sun. He will cherish such wrath (upon hearing of the
extermination of his race) as will be sufficient to consume the three
worlds. He will be competent to reduce the whole earth with all her
mountains and forests into ashes. For a little while he will quell the
flames of that fiery rage, throwing it into the Mare's mouth that wanders
through the ocean. He will have a son of the name of Richika. The whole
science of arms, O sinless one, in its embodied form will come to him,
for the extermination of the entire Kshatriya race, through a decree of
Destiny. Receiving that science by inward light, he will, by
Yoga-puissance, communicate it to his son, the highly-blessed Jamadagni
of cleansed soul. That tiger of Bhrigu's race will bear that science in
his mind. O thou of righteous soul, Jamadagni will wed a girl, taking her
from thy race, for spreading its glory, O chief of the Bharatas. Having
obtained for wife the daughter of Gadhi and thy grand-daughter, O king
that great ascetic will beget a regenerate son endued with Kshatriya
accomplishments. In thy race will be born a son, a Kshatriya endued with
the virtues of a Brahmana. Possessed of great righteousness, he will be
the son of Gadhi. Known by the name of Viswamitra, he will in energy come
to be regarded as the equal of Vrihaspati himself, the preceptor of the
celestials. The illustrious Richika will grant this son to thy race, this
Kshatriya that will be endued with high penances. In the matter of this
exchange of sons, (viz., a Kshatriya son in the race of Bhrigu and a
Brahamana son in thy race) the cause will be two women. All this will
happen at the command of the grandsire. It will never be otherwise. Unto
one that is third in descent from thee, the status of Brahmanahood will
attach. Thou shalt become a relative (by marriage) of the Bhargavas.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the high-souled ascetic
Chyavana, king Kusika became filled with joy, and made answer in the
following words, 'Indeed, O best of the Bharatas', he said, 'So be it!'
Endued with high energy, Chyavana once more addressed the king, and urged
him to accept a boon from himself. The king replied, 'Very well.' From
thee, O great ascetic, I shall obtain the fruition of my wish. Let my
race become invested with the status of Brahmanahood, and let it always
set its heart upon righteousness.' The ascetic Chyavana, thus solicited,
granted the king's prayer, and bidding farewell to the monarch, set out
on his intended tour to the sacred waters. I have now told thee
everything, O Bharata, relating to thy questions, viz., how the Bhrigus
and the Kusikas became connected with each other by marriage. Indeed, O
king, everything fell out as the Rishi Chyavana had said. The birth of
Rama (of Bhrigu's race) and of Viswamitra (of Kusika's race) happened in
the way that Chyavana had indicated.'"
