
SECTION CLXXXVI
(Swayamvara Parva)
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then those tigers among men--those brothers--the
five Pandavas, set out for Panchala to behold that country and Draupadi
and the festivities (in view of her marriage). And those tigers among
men--those oppressors of all enemies--in going along with their mother,
saw on the way numerous Brahmanas proceeding together. And those
Brahmanas who were all Brahmacharis beholding the Pandavas, O king, asked
them, 'Where are ye going to? Whence also are ye come?' And Yudhishthira
replied unto them, saying, 'Ye bulls among Brahmanas, know ye that we are
uterine brothers proceeding together with our mother. We are coming even
from Ekachakra.' The Brahmanas then said, 'Go ye this very day to the
abode of Drupada in the country of the Panchalas. A great Swayamvara
takes place there, on which a large sum of money will be spent. We also
are proceeding thither. Let us all go together. Extraordinary festivities
will take place (in Drupada's abode). The illustrious Yajnasena,
otherwise called Drupada, had a daughter risen from the centre of the
sacrificial altar. Of eyes like lotus-petals and of faultless features
endued with youth and intelligence, she is extremely beautiful. And the
slender-waisted Draupadi of every feature perfectly faultless, and whose
body emitteth a fragrance like unto that of the blue lotus for two full
miles around, is the sister of the strong-armed Dhrishtadyumna gifted
with great prowess--the (would-be) slayer of Drona--who was born with
natural mail and sword and bow and arrows from the blazing fire, himself
like unto the second Fire. And that daughter of Yajnasena will select a
husband from among the invited princes. And we are repairing thither to
behold her and the festivities on the occasion, like unto the festivities
of heaven. And to that Swayamvara will come from various lands kings and
princes who are performers of sacrifices in which the presents to the
Brahmanas are large: who are devoted to study, are holy, illustrious, and
of rigid vows; who are young and handsome; and who are mighty
car-warriors and accomplished in arms. Desirous of winning (the hand of)
the maiden those monarchs will all give away much wealth and kine and
food and other articles of enjoyment. And taking all they will give away
and witnessing the Swayamvara, and enjoying the festivities, we shall go
wheresoever we like. And there will also come unto that Swayamvara, from
various countries, actors, and bards singing the panegyrics of kings, and
dancers, and reciters of Puranas, and heralds, and powerful athletes. And
beholding all these sights and taking what will be given away to
illustrious ones, ye will return with us. Ye are all handsome and like
unto the celestials! Beholding you, Krishna may, by chance, choose some
one amongst you superior to the rest. This thy brother of mighty arms and
handsome and endued with beauty also, engaged in (athletic) encounters,
may, by chance, earn great wealth.'
"On hearing these words of the Brahmanas, Yudhishthira replied, 'Ye
Brahmanas, we will all go with you to witness that maiden's
Swayamvara--that excellent jubilee.'"
