SECTION XXV
"Yudhishthira said, 'It has been said that sojourns to sacred waters as
fraught with merit; that ablutions in such waters is meritorious; and
that listening to the excellence of such waters is also meritorious. I
desire to hear thee expatiate on this subject, O grandsire. It behoveth
thee, O chief of Bharata's race, to mention to me the sacred waters that
exist on this earth. I desire, O thou of great puissance, to hear thee
discourse on this topic.'
"Bhishma said, 'O thou of great splendour, the following enumeration of
the sacred waters on the Earth was made by Angiras. Blessed be thou, it
behoveth thee to listen to it for thou shalt then earn great merit. Once
on a time, Gautama of rigid vows, approaching the great and learned Rishi
Angiras endued with tranquillity of soul, while he was dwelling in a
forest, questioned him, saying,--O illustrious one, I have some doubts
regarding the merits attaching to sacred waters and shrines. So I desire
to hear thee discourse on that topic. Do thou, therefore, O ascetic,
discourse to me. What merits are earned by a person in respect of the
next world, by bathing in the sacred waters on the Earth, O thou of great
wisdom? Do thou expound to me this truly and according to the ordinance.'
"Angiras said, 'A person by bathing for seven days in succession in the
Chandrabhaga or the Vitasta whose waters are always seen to dance in
waves, observing a fast the while, is sure to become cleansed of all his
sins and endued with the merit of an ascetic.[233] The very many rivers
that flowing through Kasmira, fall into the great river called Sindhu
(Indus). By bathing in these rivers one is sure to become endued with
good character and to ascend to heaven after departing from this world.
By bathing in Pushkara, and Prabhasa, and Naimisha, and the ocean, and
Devika, and Indramarga, and Swarnavindu, one is sure to ascend to heaven
being seated on a celestial car, and filled with transports of joy at the
adorations of Apsara. By plunging in the waters of Hiranyavindu with a
concentrated mind and reverencing that sacred stream, and bathing next at
Kusesaya and Devendra, one becomes cleansed of all one's sins. Repairing
to Indratoya in the vicinity of the mountains of Gandhamadana and next to
Karatoya in the country called Kuranga, one should observe a fast for
three days and then bathe in those sacred waters with a concentrated
heart and pure body. By doing this, one is sure to acquire the merit of a
Horse-sacrifice. Bathing in Gangadwara and Kusavarta and Vilwaka in the
Nita mountains, as also in Kankhala, one is sure to become cleansed of
all one's sins and then ascend to heaven. If one becomes a Brahmacharin
and subdues one's wrath, devotes oneself to truth and practises
compassion towards all creatures, and then bathes in the Jala parda (Lake
of Waters), one is sure to acquire the merit of a Horse-sacrifice. That
part where Bhagirathi-Ganga flows in a northward direction is known as
the union of heaven, earth, and the nether regions. Observing a fast for
one month and bathing in that sacred Tirtha which is known to be
acceptable to Maheswara, one becomes competent to behold the deities. One
who gives oblations of water unto one's Pitris at Saptaganga and Triganga
and Indramarga, obtains ambrosia for food, if one has still to undergo
rebirth. The man who in a pure state of body and mind attends to his
daily Agnihotra and observes a fast for one month and then baths in
Mahasrama, is sure to attain success in one month. By bathing, after a
fast of three days and purifying the mind of all evil passions, in the
large lake of Bhrigu Kunda, one becomes cleansed of even the sin of
Brahmanicide. By bathing in Kanyakupa and performing one's ablutions in
Valaka, one acquires great fame among even the deities and shines in
glory. Bathing in Devika and the lake known by the name of Sundarika as
also in the Tirtha called Aswini, one acquires, in one's next life, great
beauty of form. By fasting for a fortnight and bathing in Mahaganga and
Krittikangaraka, one becomes cleansed of all one's sins and ascends to
heaven. Bathing in Vaimanika and Kinkinika, one acquires the power of
repairing everywhere at will and becomes an object of great respect in
the celestial region of the Apsaras.[234] If a person, subduing his wrath
and observing the vow of Brahmacharyya for three days, bathes in the
river Vipasa at the retreat called Kalika, he is sure to succeed in
transcending the obligation of rebirth. Bathing in the asylum that is
sacred to the Krittakas and offering oblations of water to the Pitris,
and then gratifying Mahadeva, one becomes pure in body and mind and
ascends to heaven. If one, observing a fast for three days with a
purified body and mind, bathes in Mahapura, one becomes freed from the
fear of all mobile and immobile animals as also of all animals having two
feet. By bathing in the Devadaru forest and offering oblations of water
to the Pitris and dwelling there for seven nights with a pure body and
mind, one attains to the region of the deities on departing from this
world. Bathing in the waterfalls at Sarastamva and Kusastambha and
Dronasarmapada, one is sure to attain to the region of the Apsaras where
one is waited upon with dutiful services by those superhuman beings. If
one, observing a fast, bathes at Chitrakuta and Janasthana and the waters
of Mandakini, one is sure to be united with prosperity that is
royal.[235] By repairing to the retreat that is known by the name of
Samya and residing there for a fortnight and bathing in the sacred water
that exists there, one acquires the power of disappearing at will (and
enjoy the happiness that has been ordained for the Gandharvas). Repairing
to the tirtha known by the name of Kausiki and residing there with a pure
heart and abstaining from all food and drink for three days, one acquires
the power of dwelling (in one's next life) in the happy region of the
Gandharvas. Bathing in the delightful tirtha that goes by the name of
Gandhataraka and residing there for one month, abstaining all the while
from food and drink, one acquires the power of disappearing at pleasure
and, then one and twenty days, of ascending to heaven. He that bathes in
the lake known by the name of Matanga is sure to attain to success in one
night. He that bathes in Analamva or in eternal Andhaka, or in Naimisha,
or the tirtha called Swarga, and offers oblations of water to the Pitris,
subduing his senses the while, acquires the Merit of a human
sacrifice.[236] Bathing in Ganga hrada and the tirtha known by the name
of Utpalavana and daily offering oblations of water there for a full
month to the Pitris, one acquires the merit of a Horse-sacrifice. Bathing
in the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna as also at the tirtha in
the Kalanjara mountains and offering every day oblations of water to the
Pitris for a full month, one acquires the merit that attaches to ten
Horse-sacrifices. Bathing in the Shashthi lake one acquires merit much
greater than what is attached to the gift of food. Ten thousand tirthas
and thirsty millions of other tirthas come to Prayaga (the confluence of
Ganga and Yamuna), O chief of Bharata's race in the month of Magha. He
who bathes in Prayaga, with a restrained soul and observing rigid vows
the while, in the month of Magha, becomes cleansed of all his sins, O
chief of Bharata's race, and attains to heaven. Bathing in the tirtha
that is sacred to the Maruts, as also in that which is situate in the
retreat of the Pitris, and also in that which is known by the name of
Vaivaswata, one becomes cleansed of all one's sins and becomes as pure
and sanctified as a tirtha. Repairing to Brahmasaras as also to the
Bhagirathi and bathing there and offering oblations to the Pitris every
day for a full month, abstaining from food all the while, one is sure to
attain to the region of Soma, Bathing in Utpataka and then in Ashtavakra
and offering oblations of water to the Pitris every day for twelve days
in succession, abstaining the while from food, one acquires the merits of
a Horse-sacrifice. Bathing in Asmaprishtha and Niravinda mountains and
Kraunchapadi,--all three in Gaya--one becomes cleansed of the sin of
Brahmanicide. A bath in the first place cleanses one of a single
Brahmanicide; a bath in the second cleanses one of two offences of that
character; and a bath in the third cleanses one of three such offences.
Bathing in Kalavinga, one acquires a large quantity of water (for use in
the next world). A man, by bathing in the city of Agni, acquires such
merit as entitles him to live during his next birth in the city of Agni's
daughter. Bathing in Visala in Karavirapura and offering oblations of
water unto one's Pitris, and performing one's ablutions in Devahrada too,
one becomes identified with Brahma and shines in glory as such. Bathing
in Punaravarta-nanda as also Mahananda, a man of restrained senses and
universal compassion repairs to the celestial gardens called Nandana of
Indra and is waited upon there by Apsaras of diverse tribes. Bathing with
concentrated soul in the tirtha that is called after the name of Urvasi
and that is situate in the river Lohitya, on the day of full moon of the
month of Kartika, one attains to the merits that attach to the sacrifice
called Pundarika. Bathing in Ramahrada and offering oblations of water to
the Pitris in the river Vipasa (Beas), and observing a fast for twelve
days, one becomes cleansed of all sins. Bathing in the tirtha called
Maha-hrada with a purified heart and after observing a fast for one
month, one is sure to attain to the end which was the sage Jamadagni's.
By exposing oneself to heat in the tirtha called Vindhya, a person
devoted to truth and endued with compassion for all creatures should then
betake himself to austere penances, actuated by humility. By so doing, he
is sure to attain to ascetic success in course of a single month. Bathing
in the Narmada as also in the tirtha known by the name of Surparaka,
observing a fast for a full fortnight, one is sure to become in one's
next birth a prince of the royal line. If one proceeds with restrained
senses and a concentrated soul to the tirtha known under the name of
Jamvumarga, one is sure to attain to success in course of a single day
and night. By repairing to Chandalikasrama and bathing in the tirtha
called Kokamukha, having subsisted for sometime on potherbs alone and
worn rags for vestments, one is sure to obtain ten maidens of great
beauty for one's spouses. One who lives by the side of the tirtha known
by the name of Kanya-hrada has never to go to the regions of Yama. Such a
person is sure to ascend to the regions of felicity that belong to the
celestials. One who bathes with restrained senses on the day of the new
moon in the tirtha known by the name of Prabhasa, is sure, O thou of
mighty arms, of at once attaining to success and immortality. Bathing in
the tirtha known by the name of Ujjanaka which occurs in the retreat of
Arshtisena's son, and next in the tirtha that is situate in the retreat
of Pinga, one is sure to be cleansed of all one's sins. Observing a fast
for three days and bathing in the tirtha known as Kulya and reciting the
sacred mantras that go by the name of Aghamarshana, one attains the merit
of a horse-sacrifice. Observing a fast for one night and bathing in
Pindaraka, one becomes purified on the dawn of the next day and attains
to the merit of an Agnishtoma sacrifice. One who repairs to Brahmasara
which is adorned by the woods called Dharmaranya, becomes cleansed of all
one's sins and attains to the merit of the Pundarika sacrifice. Bathing
in the waters of the Mainaka mountain and saying one's morning and
evening prayers there and living at the spot for a month, restraining
desire, one attains to the merit of all the sacrifices. Setting out for
Kalolaka and Nandikunda and Uttara-manasa, and reaching a spot that is
hundred yojanas remote from any of them, one becomes cleansed of the sin
of foeticide, One who succeeds in obtaining a sight of image of
Nandiswara, becomes cleansed of all sins. Bathing in the tirtha called
Swargamarga one is sure to proceed to the regions of Brahman. The
celebrated Himavat is sacred. That prince of mountains is the
father-in-law of Sankara. He is a mine of all jewels and gems and is the
resort of the Siddhas and Charanas. That regenerate person who is fully
conversant with the Vedas and who, regarding this life to be exceedingly
unstable, casts off his body on those mountains, abstaining from all food
and drink in accordance with the rites laid down in the scriptures, after
having adored the deities and bent his head in worship of the ascetics,
is sure to attain to success and proceed to the eternal regions of
Brahman. There is nothing unattainable to him who resides in a tirtha,
restraining lust and subjugating wrath, in consequence of such residence.
For the purpose of repairing to all the tirthas in the world, one should
mentally think of those amongst them that are almost inaccessible or
sojourns to which are attended with insurmountable difficulties. Sojourns
to tirthas is productive of the merits of sacrifices. They are competent
to cleanse everybody of sin. Fraught with great excellence, they are
capable of leading to heaven. The subject is truly a great mystery. The
very deities should bathe in tirthas. To them also they are
sin-cleansing. This discourse on tirthas should be imparted to Brahmanas,
and to such honest or righteous persons as are bent upon achieving what
is for their own good. It should also be recited in the hearing of one's
well-wishers and friends and of one's obedient and devoted disciples.
Angiras possessed of great ascetic merit, had imparted this discourse to
Gautama. Angiras himself had obtained it from Kasyapa of great
intelligence. The great Rishi regard this discourse as worthy of constant
repetition. It is the foremost of all cleansing things. If one recites it
regularly every day, one is sure to become cleansed of every sin and to
proceed to heaven after the termination of this life. One who listens to
this discourse recited in his hearing,--this discourse, viz., of Angiras,
that is regarded as a mystery,--is sure to attain in one's next life to
be born in a good family and, what is more, one would become endued with
the memory of one's previous existence.'"
