
SECTION XVII
"Sauti said, 'O ascetic, about this time the two sisters saw approaching
near, that steed of complacent appearance named Uchchaihsravas who was
worshipped by the gods, that gem of steeds, who arose at the churning of
the Ocean for nectar. Divine, graceful, perpetually young, creation's
master-piece, and of irresistible vigour, it was blest with every
auspicious mark.'
"Saunaka asked, 'Why did the gods churn the Ocean for nectar, and under
what circumstances and when as you say, did that best of steeds so
powerful and resplendent spring?'
"Sauti said, 'There is a mountain named Meru, of blazing appearance, and
looking like a heap of effulgence. The rays of the Sun falling on its
peaks of golden lustre are dispersed by them. Decked with gold and
exceedingly beautiful, that mountain is the haunt of the gods and the
Gandharvas. It is immeasurable and unapproachable by men of manifold
sins. Dreadful beasts of prey wander over its breasts, and it is
illuminated by many divine life-giving herbs. It stands kissing the
heavens by its height and is the first of mountains. Ordinary people
cannot even think of ascending it. It is graced with trees and streams,
and resounds with the charming melody of winged choirs. Once the
celestials sat on its begemmed peak--in conclave. They who had practised
penances and observed excellent vows for amrita now seemed to be eager
seekers alter amrita (celestial ambrosia). Seeing the celestial assembly
in anxious mood Nara-yana said to Brahman, 'Do thou churn the Ocean with
the gods and the Asuras. By doing so, amrita will be obtained as also all
drugs and gems. O ye gods, chum the Ocean, ye will discover amrita.'"
So ends the seventeenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
