SECTION XXIX
"Bhishma said, 'Thus advised by Indra, Matanga, observant of vows,
refused, to hear what he was bid. On the other hand, with regulated vows
and cleansed soul, he practised austere penances by standing on one foot
for a thousand years, and was deeply engaged in Yoga-meditation. After a
thousand years had passed away, Sakra once more came to see him. Indeed,
the slayer of Vala and Vritra said unto him the same words.'
'Matanga said, 'I have passed these thousand years, standing on one foot,
in deep meditation, observing of the vow of Brahmacharyya. Why is it that
I have not yet succeeded in acquiring the status of a Brahmana?'
'Sakra said, 'One born on a Chandala cannot, by any means acquire the
status of a Brahmana. Do thou, therefore name some boon so that all this
labour of thine may not prove fruitless--Thus addressed by the chief of
the celestials, Matanga became filled with grief. He repaired to Prayaga,
and passed there a hundred years, standing all the while on his toes. In
consequence of the observance of such Yoga which was extremely difficult
to bear, he became very much emaciated and his arteries and veins became
swollen and visible. He was reduced to only skin and bones. Indeed, it
has been heard by us that the righteous-souled Matanga, while practising
those austerities at Gaya, dropped down on the ground from sheer
exhaustion. The lord and giver of boons, engaged in the good of all
creatures, viz., Vasava beholding him falling down, quickly came to that
spot and held him fast.'
"Sakra said, 'It seems, O Matanga, that the status of a Brahmana which
thou seekest is ill-suited to thee. That status is incapable of being
attained by thee. Verily, in thy case, it is surrounded by many dangers.
A person by worshipping a Brahmana obtains happiness; while by abstaining
from such worship, he obtains grief and misery. The Brahmana is, with
respect to all creatures, the giver of what they prize or covet and the
protector of what they already have. It is through the Brahmanas that the
Pitris and the deities become gratified. The Brahmana, O Matanga, is said
to be foremost of all created Beings. The Brahmana grants all objects
that are desired and in the way they are desired?[248] Wandering through
innumerable orders of Being and undergoing repeated rebirths, one
succeeds in some subsequent birth in acquiring the status of a Brahmana.
That status is really incapable of being obtained by persons of
uncleansed souls. Do thou, therefore, give up the idea. Do thou name some
other boon. The particular boon which thou seekest is incapable of being
granted to thee.'
"Matanga said, 'Afflicted as I am with grief, why, O Sakra, dost thou
afflict me further (with such speeches as these)? Thou art striking one
that is already dead, by this behaviour. I do not pity thee for having
acquired the status of a Brahmana thou now failest to retain it (for thou
hast no compassion to show for one like me). O thou of a hundred
sacrifices, the status of a Brahmana as thou sayest be really
unattainable by any of the three other orders, yet, men that have
succeeded in acquiring (through natural means) that high status do not
adhere to it (for what sins do net even Brahmanas commit). Those who
having acquired the status of a Brahmana that, like affluence, is so
difficult to acquire, do not seek to keep it up (by practising the
necessary duties), must be regarded to be the lowest of wretches in this
world. Indeed, they are the most sinful of all creatures. Without doubt,
the status of a Brahmana is exceedingly difficult to attain, and once
being attained, it is difficult to maintain it. It is capable of
dispelling every kind of grief. Alas, having attained to it, men do not
always seek to keep it up (by practising righteousness and the other
duties that attach to it). When even such persons are regarded as
Brahmanas why is it that I, who am contented with my own self, who am
above all couples of opposites, who am dissociated from all worldly
objects, who am observant of the duty of compassion towards all creatures
and of self-restraint of conduct, should not be regarded as deserving of
that status.[249] How unfortunate I am, O Purandara, that through the
fault of my mother I have been reduced to this condition, although I am
not unrighteous in my behaviour? Without doubt, Destiny is incapable of
being warded off or conquered by individual exertion, since, O lord, I am
unable to acquire, notwithstanding these persistent efforts of mine, the
object, upon the acquisition of which I have set my heart. When such is
the case, O righteous one, it behoves thee to grant me some other boon
if, indeed, I have become worthy of thy grace or if I have a little of
merit.'
"Bhishma continued, 'The slayer of Vala and Vritra then said unto
him,--Do thou name the boon.--Thus urged by the great Indra, Matanga said
the following words:
"Matanga said, 'Let me be possessed of the power of assuming any form at
will, and journeying through the skies and let me enjoy whatever
pleasures I may set my heart upon. And let me also have the willing
adorations of both Brahmanas and Kshatriyas. I bow to thee by bending my
head, O god. It behoveth thee to do that also by which my fame, O
Purandara, May live for ever in the world.'
"Sakra said, 'Thou shalt be celebrated as the deity of a particular
measure of verse and thou shalt obtain the worship of all woman. Thy
fame, O son, shall become unrivalled in the three worlds.'--Having
granted him these boons, Vasava disappeared there and then. Matanga also,
casting off his life-breaths, attained to a high place. Thou mayst thus
see, O Bharata, that the status of a Brahmana is very high. That status
is incapable of being acquired here (except in the natural way of birth)
as said by the great Indra himself.'
merit.'
merit.'
