SECTION LIX
"Yudhishthira said, 'Amongst all those gifts that are mentioned in the
treatises other than the Vedas, which gift, O chief of Kuru's race, is
the most distinguished in thy opinion? O puissant one, great is the
curiosity I feel with respect to this matter. Do thou discourse to me
also of that gift which follows the giver into the next world.'[317]
"Bhishma said, 'An assurance unto all creatures of love and affection and
abstention from every kind of injury, acts of kindness and favour done to
a person in distress, gifts of articles made unto one that solicits with
thirst and agreeable to the solicitor's wishes, and whatever gifts are
made without the giver's ever thinking of them as gifts made by him,
constitute, O chief of Bharata's race, the highest and best of gifts.
Gift of gold, gift of kine, and gift of earth,--these are regarded as
sin-cleansing. They rescue the giver from his evil acts. O chief of men,
do thou always make such gifts unto those that are righteous. Without
doubt, gifts rescue the giver from all his sins. That person who wishes
to make his gifts eternal should always give unto persons possessed of
the requisite qualifications whatever articles are desired by all and
whatever things are the best in his house. The man who makes gifts of
agreeable things and who does to others what is agreeable to others,
always succeeds in obtaining things that are agreeable to himself. Such a
person certainly becomes agreeable unto all, both here and hereafter.
That man, O Yudhishthira, is a cruel wretch, who, through vanity, does
not, to the extent of his means, attend to the wishes of one who is poor
and helpless, and who solicits assistance.[318] He is verily the foremost
of men who shows favour unto even an helpless enemy fallen into distress
when such enemy presents himself and prays for help. No man is equal to
him (in merit) who satisfies the hunger of a person that is emaciated,
possessed of learning, destitute of the means of support, and weakened by
misery. One should always, O son of Kunti, dispel by every means in one's
power, the distress of righteous persons observant of vows and acts, who,
though destitute of sons and spouses and plunged into misery, do not yet
solicit others for any kind of assistance. Those persons who do not utter
blessings upon the deities and men (in expectation of gifts), who are
deserving of reverence and always contented, and who subsist upon such
alms as they get without solicitation of any kind, are regarded as
veritable snakes of virulent poison. Do thou, O Bharata, always protect
thyself from them by making gifts unto them. They are competent to make
the foremost of Ritwikas. Thou art to find them out by means of thy spies
and agents.[319] Thou shouldst honour those men by gifts of good houses
equipped with every necessary article, with slaves and serving men, with
good robes and vestments, O son of Kuru, and with all articles competent
to contribute to one's pleasure and happiness. Righteous men of righteous
deeds should make such gifts, impelled by the motive that it is their
duty to act in that way and not from desire of reaping any rewards
therefrom. Verily good men should act in this way so that the virtuous
men described above might not, O Yudhishthira, feel any disinclination to
accept those gifts sanctified by devotion and faith. There are persons
bathed in learning and bathed in vows. Without depending upon anybody
they obtain their means of subsistence. These Brahmanas of rigid vows are
devoted to Vedic study and penances without proclaiming their practices
to any one. Whatever gifts thus mayst make unto those persons of pure
behaviour, of thorough mastery over their senses, and always contented
with their own wedded spouses in the matter of desire, are sure to win
for thee a merit that will accompany thee into all the worlds into which
thou mayst go. One reaps the same merit by making gifts unto regenerate
persons of restrained souls which one wins by properly pouring libations
unto the sacred fire morning and evening. Even this is the sacrifice
spread out for thee,--a sacrifice that is sanctified by devotion and
faith and that is endued with Dakshina. It is distinguished above all
other sacrifices. Let that sacrifice ceaselessly flow from thee as thou
givest away.[320] Performed in view of such men, O Yudhishthira, a
sacrifice in which the water that is sprinkled for dedicating gifts
constitutes the oblations in honour of the Pitris, and devotion and
worship rendered unto such superior men, serves to free one of the debts
one owes to the deities.[321] Those persons that do not yield to wrath
and that never desire to take even a blade of grass belonging to others,
as also they that are of agreeable speech, deserve to receive from us the
most reverent worship. Such persons and others (because free from desire)
never pay their regards to the giver. Nor do they strive for obtaining
gifts. They should, however, be cherished by givers as they cherish their
own sons. I bend my head unto them. From them also both Heaven and Hell
may become one's.[322] Ritwiks and Purohitas and preceptors, when
conversant with the Vedas and when behaving mildly towards disciples,
become such. Without doubt, Kshatriya energy loses its force upon a
Brahmana when it encounters him. Thinking that thou art a king, that thou
art possessed of great power, and that thou hast affluence, do not, O
Yudhishthira, enjoy thy affluence without giving anything unto the
Brahmanas. Observing the duties of thy own order, do thou worship the
Brahmanas with whatever wealth thou hast, O sinless one, for purposes of
adornment or sustaining thy power. Let the Brahmanas live in whatever way
they like. Thou shouldst always bend thy head unto them with reverence.
Let them always rejoice in thee as thy children, living happily and
according to their wishes. Who else than thou, O best of the Kurus, is
competent to provide the means of subsistence for such Brahmanas as are
endued with eternal contentment as are thy well-wishers, and as are
gratified by only a little? As women have one eternal duty, in this
world, viz., dependence upon and obedient service to their husbands, and
as such duty constitutes their only end, even so is the service to
Brahmanas Our eternal duty and end. If, at sight of cruelties and other
sinful acts in Kshatriyas, the Brahmanas, O son, unhonoured by us,
forsake us all, I say, of what use would life be to us, in the absence of
all contact with the Brahmanas, especially as we shall then have to drag
on our existence without being able to study the Vedas to perform
sacrifices, to hope for worlds of bliss hereafter, and to achieve great
feats? I shall, in this connection, tell thee what the eternal usage is.
In days of yore, O king, the Kshatriyas used to serve the Brahmanas. The
Vaisya in a similar manner used in those days to worship the royal order,
and the Sudra to worship the Vaisya. Even this is what is heard. The
Brahmana was like a blazing fire. Without being able to touch him or
approach his presence, the Sudra used to serve the Brahmana from a
distance. It was only the Kshatriya and the Vaisya who could serve the
Brahmana by touching his person or approaching his presence. The
Brahmanas are endued with a mild disposition. They are truthful in
behaviour. They are followers of the true religion. When angry, they are
like snakes of virulent poison. Such being their nature, do thou, O
Yudhishthira, serve and attend upon them with obedience and reverence.
The Brahmanas are superior to even those that are higher than the high
and the low. The energy and penances of even those Kshatriyas who blaze
forth with energy and might, become powerless and neutralised when they
come in contact with the Brahmanas. My sire himself is not dearer to me
than the Brahmanas. My mother is not dearer to me than they. My
grandsire, O king, is not dearer, my own self is not dearer, my life
itself is not dearer, O king, to me than the Brahmanas! On earth there is
nothing, O Yudhishthira, that is dearer to me than thou. But, O chief of
Bharata's race, the Brahmanas are dearer to me than even thou. I tell
thee truly, O son of Pandu! I swear by this truth, by which I hope to
acquire all those regions of bliss that have been Santanu's. I behold
those sacred regions with Brahma shining conspicuously before them. I
shall repair thither, O son, and reside in them for unending days.
Beholding these regions, O best of the Bharatas (with my spiritual eyes),
I am filled with delight at the thought of all these acts which I have
done in aid and honour of the Brahmanas, O monarch!'"
