
SECTION CLXLIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then those illustrious sons of Pritha, on returning
to the potter's abode, approached their mother. And those first of men
represented Yajnaseni unto their mother as the alms they had obtained
that day. And Kunti who was there within the room and saw not her sons,
replied, saying, 'Enjoy ye all (what ye have obtained).' The moment
after, she beheld Krishna and then she said, 'Oh, what have I said?' And
anxious from fear of sin, and reflecting how every one could be
extricated from the situation, she took the cheerful Yajnaseni by the
hand, and approaching Yudhishthira said, 'The daughter of king Yajnasena
upon being represented to me by thy younger brothers as the alms they had
obtained, from ignorance, O king, I said what was proper, viz., 'Enjoy ye
all what hath been obtained. O thou bull of the Kuru race, tell me how my
speech may not become untrue; how sin may not touch the daughter of the
king of Panchala, and how also she may not become uneasy.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by his mother that hero among
men, that foremost scion of the Kuru race, the intelligent king
(Yudhishthira), reflecting for a moment, consoled Kunti, and addressing
Dhananjaya, said, 'By thee, O Phalguna, hath Yajnaseni been won. It is
proper, therefore, that thou shouldst wed her. O thou withstander of all
foes, igniting the sacred fire, take thou her hand with due rites.'
"Arjuna, hearing this, replied, 'O king, do not make me a participator in
sin. Thy behest is not conformable to virtue. That is the path followed
by the sinful. Thou shouldst wed first, then the strong-armed Bhima of
inconceivable feats, then myself, then Nakula, and last of all, Sahadeva
endued with great activity. Both Vrikodara and myself, and the twins and
this maiden also, all await, O monarch, thy commands. When such is the
state of things, do that, after reflection, which would be proper, and
conformable virtue, and productive of fame, and beneficial unto the king
of Panchala. All of us are obedient to thee. O, command us as thou
likest.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Jishnu, so full of
respect and affection, the Pandavas all cast their eyes upon the princess
of Panchala. And the princess of Panchala also looked at them all. And
casting their glances on the illustrious Krishna, those princes looked at
one another. And taking their seats, they began to think of Draupadi
alone. Indeed, after those princes of immeasurable energy had looked at
Draupadi, the God of Desire invaded their hearts and continued to crush
all their senses. As the lavishing beauty of Panchali who had been
modelled by the Creator himself, was superior to that of all other women
on earth, it could captivate the heart of every creature. And
Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, beholding his younger brothers,
understood what was passing in their minds. And that bull among men
immediately recollected the words of Krishna-Dwaipayana. And the king,
then, from fear of a division amongst the brothers, addressing all of
them, said, 'The auspicious Draupadi shall be the common wife of us all.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The sons of Pandu, then, hearing those words of
their eldest brother, began to revolve them in their minds in great
cheerfulness. The hero of the Vrishni race (Krishna suspecting the five
persons he had seen at the Swayamvara to be none else than the heroes of
the Kuru race), came accompanied by the son of Rohini (Valadeva), to the
house of the potter where those foremost of men had taken up their
quarters. On arriving there, Krishna and Valadeva beheld seated in that
potter's house Ajatasanu (Yudhishthira) of well developed and long arms,
and his younger brothers passing the splendour of fire sitting around
him. Then Vasudeva approaching that foremost of virtuous men--the son of
Kunti--and touching the feet of that prince of the Ajamida race, said, 'I
am Krishna.' And the son of Rohini (Valadeva) also approaching
Yudhishthira, did the same. And the Pandavas, beholding Krishna and
Valadeva, began to express great delight. And, O thou foremost of the
Bharata race, those heroes of the Yadu race thereafter touched also the
feet of Kunti, their father's sister. And Ajatasatru, that foremost of
the Kuru race, beholding Krishna, enquired after his well-being and
asked, 'How, O Vasudeva, hast thou been able to trace us, as we are
living in disguise?' And Vasudeva, smilingly answered, 'O king, fire,
even if it is covered, can be known. Who else among men than the Pandavas
could exhibit such might? Ye resisters of all foes, ye sons of Pandu, by
sheer good fortune have ye escaped from that fierce fire. And it is by
sheer good fortune alone that the wicked son of Dhritarashtra and his
counsellors have not succeeded in accomplishing their wishes. Blest be
ye! And grow ye in prosperity like a fire in a cave gradually growing and
spreading itself all around. And lest any of the monarchs recognise ye,
let us return to our tent.' Then, obtaining Yudhishthira's leave, Krishna
of prosperity knowing no decrease, accompanied by Valadeva, hastily went
away from the potter's abode.'"
