SECTION CIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast discoursed to us on diverse kinds of gift,
on tranquillity of soul, on Truth, on compassion, on contentment with
one's wedded wife, and the merits of gift. It is known to thee, O
grandsire, that there is nothing whose puissance is superior to that of
penances. It behoveth thee to expound to us what constitutes the highest
penances.'
"Bhishma said, 'I tell thee, O Yudhishthira, that one attains to a region
of felicity that corresponds with the kind of penances that one observes.
This is what I hold, O son of Kunti, that there is no penance that is
superior to abstention from food! In this connection is recited the
ancient narrative of the discourse between Bhagiratha and the illustrious
Brahman (the Grandsire of the Creation). It has been heard by us, O
Bharata, that Bhagiratha attained to that region which transcends that of
the deities, of kine, and of the Rishis. Beholding this, O monarch, the
Grandsire Brahman, addressing Bhagiratha, said, 'How, O Bhagiratha, hast
thou attained to this region that is so difficult of attainment? Neither
the deities, nor Gandharvas, nor human beings, O Bhagiratha succeed in
coming here without having practised the severest austerities. How,
indeed, hast thou attained to this region?'
"Bhagiratha said, 'I used to make gifts of hundreds of thousands of gold
coin unto the Brahmanas, observing the Brahmacharya vow all the while, it
is not through the merit on those gifts, O learned one, that I have
attained to this region. I performed the Ekaratra sacrifice for ten
times, and the Pancharatra sacrifice for as many times. The Ekadasaratra
sacrifice was performed by me eleven times. The great sacrifice of
Jyotishtoma was performed by me a hundred times. It is not, however,
through the merits of those sacrifices that I have attained to this
region of felicity.[454] For a hundred years I lived continuously by the
side of the holy Jahnavi, all the while practising the severest
austerities. There I made gifts unto the Brahmanas of thousands of male
and female slaves. By the side of the Pushkara lakes I made gifts unto
the Brahmanas, for a hundred thousand times, a hundred thousand steeds,
and two hundred thousand kine. I also gave away a thousand damsels of
great beauty, each adorned with golden moons, and sixty thousand more
decked with ornaments of pure gold. It is not, however, through the
merits of those acts that I have succeeded in attaining to these
regions.[455] O lord of the universe, performing those sacrifices known
by the name of Gosava, I gave away ten Arvudas of kine, presenting each
Brahmana with ten kine, each of whom was accompanied with her calf, each
of whom yielded milk at the time, and with each of whom were given a
vessel of gold and one of white brass for milking her. Performing many
Soma sacrifices, I gave away unto each Brahmana ten kine each of whom
yielded milk, and each of whom had brought forth only her first calf,
besides making presents unto them of hundreds of kine belonging to that
species which is known by the name of Rohini. I also gave away unto the
Brahmanas twice ten Prayutas of other kine, all yielding milk. It is not
through the merit of those gifts, O Brahman, that I have succeeded in
attaining to this region of felicity. I also gave away a hundred thousand
horses of the Valhika breed, all white of complexion, and adorned with
garlands of gold. It is not, however, through the merits of those acts
that I have attained to this region. I gave away eight crores of golden
coins unto the Brahmanas, O Brahman, and then another ten crores also, in
each sacrifice that I performed. It is not, however, through the merits
of those acts that I have attained to this region of felicity. I also
gave away ten and then seven crores of steeds, O Grandsire, each of green
complexion, each having ears that were dark, and each adorned with
garlands of gold. I also gave away ten and seven thousand elephants of
huge size, of teeth as large as plough-shares, each having those whorls
on its body which are called Padmas, and each adorned with garlands of
gold. I gave away ten thousand cars, O Grandsire, whose limbs were made
of gold, and which were adorned with diverse ornaments of gold. I also
gave away seven thousand other cars with steeds yoked unto each. All the
steeds that were yoked unto them were adorned with ornaments of gold.
Those cars represented the Dakshinas of a sacrifice and were of exactly
that kind which is indicated in the Vedas. In the ten great Vajapeya
sacrifices that I performed, I gave away a thousand horses each endued
with the puissance of Indra himself, judged by their prowess and the
sacrifices they had performed. Spending a vast sum of money, O Grandsire,
and performing eight Rajasuya sacrifices, I gave away (unto the Brahmanas
that officiated in them) a thousand kings whose necks were adorned with
garlands of gold, after having vanquished them in battle. It is not,
however, through the merits of those acts that I have attained to this
region. In those sacrifices, O Lord of the universe, the presents that
flowed from me were as copious as the stream of Ganga herself. Unto each
Brahmana I gave two thousand elephants decked with gold, as many steeds
adorned with golden ornaments, and a hundred villages of the best kind.
Verily, I gave these unto each Brahmana for three times in succession.
Observant of penances, subsisting on regulated diet, adopting
tranquillity of soul, and restraining speech, I dwelt for a long time on
the breast of Himavat by the side of that Ganga whose irresistible
current (as it fell from heaven) was borne by Mahadeva on his head. It is
not through the merit of these acts, O Grand sire, that I have attained
to this region. Throwing the Sami, I adored the gods in myriads of such
sacrifices as are completed in course of a single day, and such others as
take twelve days for completing, and others still as can be completed in
three and ten days, besides many Pundarikas. I have not attained to this
region through the merits of any of those sacrifices.[456] I gave unto
the Brahmanas eight thousand white-complexioned bulls, each graced with a
beautiful hump, and each having one of its horns covered with gold. Unto
them I also gave beautiful wives whose necks were adorned with chains of
gold. I also gave away large heaps of gold and wealth of other kinds.
Verily, I gave away hills of gems and precious stones. Villages,
numbering by thousands and teeming with wealth and corn, were also given
away by me. With all my senses about me, I gave away unto the Brahmanas a
hundred thousand kine each of whom had brought forth only her first calf,
at many great sacrifices which I performed. It is not, however, through
the merits of those acts that I have attained to this region. I adored
the deities in a sacrifice that is completed in eleven days. Twice I
adored them in sacrifices that are completed in twelve days. I adored
them also many a time in the horse-sacrifices. Six and ten times I
performed the Arkayana sacrifice. It is not through the merits of those
acts that I have attained to this region. I also gave unto each Brahmana
a forest of Kanchana trees extending for a Yojana on every side, and with
each tree adorned with jewels and gems. It is not through the merits of
that act that I have attained to this region. For thirty years, with
heart perfectly freed from wrath, I observed the Turayana vow that is
possessed of very superior merit, and gave away unto the Brahmanas every
day nine hundred kine. Indeed, O Lord of the universe, every one of those
kine belonged to the Rohini species, and yielded milk at the time I gave
them away. It is not through the merits of those acts, O chief of the
deities, that I have attained to this region. I worshipped thirty fires,
O Brahmana, every day. I adored the deities in eight sacrifices in which
the fat of all animals was poured on the fire. I adored them in seven
sacrifices in which the fat of human beings was poured on the fire. I
adored them in a thousand and twenty-eight Viswajit sacrifices. It is not
through the merits of those sacrifices O Lord of all the deities, that I
have attained to this region. On the banks of Sarayu and Vahuda and Ganga
as also in the woods of Naimisha, I gave away millions of kine unto the
Brahmanas. It is not through the merits of those acts that I have
attained to this region. The vow of fast had been known to Indra. He had,
however, kept it a secret. Sukra, the descendant of Bhrigu, obtained a
knowledge of it by means of spiritual sight acquired through penances.
Blazing with energy as he does, it is Usanas who first made it known to
the universe. I observed that vow, O boon giving Deity! When I
accomplished that very superior vow, the Brahmana became all gratified
with me. A thousand Rishis came thither. All those Brahmanas and Rishis,
O puissant lord, gratified with me, said, 'Do thou repair to the region
of Brahmana! It is in consequence of the merits of that vow that I have
succeeded in attaining to this region of very superior felicity. There is
no doubt in this. Asked by the Supreme Ordainer of all things, I have
duly expounded the merits of the vow of fast. In my opinion, there is no
penance higher than fast. I vow to thee, O foremost of all the deities!
Be thou propitious unto me!'
"Bhishma continued, 'King Bhagiratha, who had said so and who deserved
every honour was on the conclusion of his speech, honoured by Brahman
according to the rites ordained for that purpose. Do thou, therefore, O
Yudhishthira, observe the vow of fast and worship the Brahmanas every
day. The words uttered by Brahmanas can accomplish everything both here
and hereafter. Indeed, the Brahmanas should ever be gratified with gifts
of robes food and white complexioned kine and good dwelling houses and
mansions. The very deities should gratify the Brahmanas. Freeing thyself
from cupidity, do thou practise this vow of very superior merit that is
not known to all!'"
