SECTION CVII
"Yudhishthira said, 'O high-souled grandsire, thou hast duly discoursed
to us on the subject of Sacrifices, including the merits in detail that
attach to them both here and hereafter. It should be remembered, however,
O grandsire, that Sacrifices are incapable of being performed, by people
that are poor, for these require a large store of diverse kinds of
articles. Indeed, O grandsire, the merit attaching to Sacrifices can be
acquired by only kings and princes. That merit is incapable of being
acquired by those that are destitute of wealth and divested of ability
and that live alone and are helpless. Do thou tell us, O grandsire, what
the ordinances are in respect of those acts that are fraught with merit
equal to what attaches to sacrifices and which, therefore, are capable of
being performed by persons destitute of means.'[490]
"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O Yudhishthira! Those ordinances that I have told
thee of,--those, viz., that were first promulgated by the great Rishi
Angiras, and that have reference to meritorious facts for their
soul,--are regarded as equal to Sacrifices (in respect of the fruits they
bring about both here and hereafter). That man who takes one meal in the
forenoon and one at night, without taking any food or drink during the
interval, and who observes this regulations for a period of six years in
succession, abstaining all the while from injuring any creature and
regularly pouring libations on his sacred fire every day, attains,
without doubt, to success. Such a man acquires hereafter a car of the
complexion of heated gold, and attains to a residence, for millions of
years, in the region of Prajapati, in the company of celestial damsels,
that ever echoes with the sound of music and dance, and blazes with the
effulgence of fire. He who passes three years, confining himself every
day to one meal and abstaining all the while from congress with any other
woman save his own wedded wife, attains to the merit of the Agnishtoma
sacrifice, Such a man is regarded as having performed a Sacrifice, with
plenty of gifts in gold, that is dear to Vasava himself. By practising
truthfulness of speech, making gifts, reverencing the Brahmanas, avoiding
malice, becoming forgiving and self-restrained, and conquering wrath, a
man attains to the highest end. Riding on a car of the complexion of
white clouds that is drawn by swans, he lives, for millions and million
of years, in the company of Apsaras. Fasting for a whole day and eating
only one meal on the second day, he who pours libations upon his sacred
fire for the period of a whole year,--verily, he who observes such a fast
and attends every day to his fire and rises every day from bed before
sunrise, attains to the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. Such a man
acquires a car drawn by swans and cranes. Surrounded by the most
beautiful damsels, he resides in the region of Indra. That man who eats
only one meal every third day, and pours libations every day on his
sacred fire for a period of a whole year,--indeed, he who thus attends to
his fire every day and wakes up from sleep every morning before the sun
is up, attains to the high merit of the Atiratra sacrifice. He acquires a
car drawn by peacocks and swans and cranes. Proceeding to the region of
the seven (celestial) Rishis, he takes up his residence there, surrounded
by Apsaras of great beauty. It is well-known that such residence lasts
for full three Padmas of years.[491] Fasting for three days in
succession, he who takes only one meal every fourth day, and pours
libations every day on his sacred fire, acquires the high merit of the
Vajapeya sacrifice. The car he ac-quires is graced by celestial damsels
of great beauty that have Indra for their father. He resides in the
region of Indra for millions and millions of years and experiences great
happiness by witnessing the sports of the chief of the deities. Fasting
for four days in succession, he who eats only one meal every fifth day,
and pours libations on the sacred fire every day for the period of a
whole year, and who lives without cupidity, telling the truth,
reverencing the Brahmanas, abstaining from every kind of injury, and
avoiding malice and sin, acquires the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice.
The car he rides is made of gold and drawn by swans and endued with the
effulgence of many suns rising together. He acquires, a palatial mansion
of pure white. He lives there in great happiness for full one and fifty
Padmas of years.[492] Fasting for five days, he who takes food on only
the sixth day, and pours libations on his sacred fire every day for a
whole year, and who performs three ablutions in course of the day for
purifying himself and saying his prayers and doing his worship, and who
leads a life of Brahmacharya, divested of malice in his conduct, acquires
the merit of the Gomedha sacrifice. He acquires an excellent car adorned
with pure gold, possessed of the effulgence of a blazing fire and drawn
by swans and peacocks. He sleeps on the lap of Apsaras and is awakened
every morning by the melodious tinkle of Nupuras and Kanchis. He leads
such a life of happiness for ten thousand million years and three
thousand million besides and eight and ten Padmas and two Patakas.[493]
Such a man resides also, honoured by all, in the region of Brahma for as
many years as there are hairs on the bodies of hundreds of bears. Fasting
for six days, he who eats only one meal every seventh day and pours
libations on the sacred fire every day, for a full year, restraining
speech all the while and observing the vow of Brahmacharya, and
abstaining from the use of flowers and unguents and honey and meat,
attains to the region of the Maruts and of India. Crowned with the
fruition of every desire as it springs up in the mind, he is waited upon
and adored by celestial damsels. He acquires the merits of a sacrifice in
which abundance of gold is given away. Proceeding to the regions named,
he lives there for countless years in the greatest happiness[494]. He who
shows forgiveness to all and fasting for seven days eats on every eighth
day for a whole year, and, pouring libations every day on the sacred
fire, adores the deities regularly, acquires the high merits of the
Paundarika sacrifice. The car he rides is of a colour like that of the
lotus. Without doubt, such a man acquires also a large number of damsels,
possessed of youth and beauty, some having complexions that are dark,
some with complexions like that of gold, and some that are Syamas, whose
looks and attitudes are of the most agreeable kind. He who fasts for
eight days and takes only one meal on every ninth day for a whole year,
and pours libations on the sacred fire every day, acquires the high
merits of a thousand Horse-sacrifices. The car he rides in Heaven is as
beautiful as a lotus. He always makes his journeys on that car,
accompanied by the daughters of Rudra adorned with celestial garlands and
endued with the effulgence of the midday sun or the fires of blazing
flames. Attaining to the regions of Rudra, he lives there in great
happiness for countless years. He who fasts for nine days and takes only
one meal every tenth day for a whole year, and pours libations on his
sacred fire every day, acquires the high merit of a thousand
Horse-sacrifices, and attains to the companionship of Brahmanas'
daughters endued with beauty capable of charming the hearts of all
creatures. These damsels, possessed of such beauty, and some of them
possessed of complexion like that of the lotus and some like that of the
same flower of the blue variety, always keep him in joy[495]. He acquires
a beautiful vehicle, that moves in beautiful circles and that looks like
the dense cloud called Avarta, verily, it may be said to resemble also an
ocean-wave. That vehicle resounds with the constant tinkle of rows of
pearls and gems, and the melodious blare of conchs, and is adorned with
columns made of crystals and diamonds, as also with an altar constructed
of the same minerals. He makes his journeys on such a car, drawn by swans
and cranes and lives for millions and millions of years in great
happiness in heaven. He who fasts for ten days and eats only ghee on
every eleventh day for a whole year and pours libations on his sacred
fire every day, who never, in word or thought, covets the companionship
of other people's wives and who never utters an untruth even for the sake
of his mother and father, succeeds in beholding Mahadeva of great
puissance seated on his car. Such a person acquires the high merit of a
thousand Horse-sacrifices. He beholds the car of the Self-born Brahman
himself approach for taking him on it. He rides in it, accompanied by
celestial damsels possessed of great beauty, and complexion as effulgent
as that of pure gold. Endued with the blazing splendour of the Yoga-fire,
he lives for countless years in a celestial mansion in heaven, full of
every happiness. For those countless years he experiences the joy of
bending his head in reverence unto Rudra adored by deities and Danavas.
Such a person obtains every day the sight of the great deity. That man
who having fasted for eleven days eats only a little ghee on the twelfth,
and observes this conduct for a whole year, succeeds in obtaining the
merits attaching to all the sacrifices. The car he rides in is possessed
of the effulgence of a dozen suns. Adorned with gems and pearls and
corals of great value, embellished with rows of swans and snakes and of
peacocks and Chakravakas uttering their melodious notes, and beautified
with large domes, is the residence to which he attains in the region of
Brahman. That abode, O king, is always filled with men and women (who
wait upon him for service). Even this is what the highly blessed Rishi
Angiras, conversant with every duty, said (regarding the fruits of such a
fast). That man who having fasted for twelve days eats a little ghee on
the thirteenth, and bears himself in this way for a whole year, succeeds
in attaining to the merits of the divine sacrifice. Such a man obtains a
car of the complexion of the newly-blown lotus, adorned with pure gold
and heaps of jewels and gems. He proceeds to the region of the Maruts
that teem with celestial damsels, that are adorned with every kind of
celestial ornament, that are redolent with celestial perfumes, and that
contain every element of felicity. The number of years he resides in
those happy regions is countless[496]. Soothed with the sound of music
and the melodious voice of Gandharvas and the sounds and blare of drums
and Panavas, he is constantly gladdened by celestial damsels of great
beauty. That man who having fasted for thirteen days eats a little ghee
on the fourteenth day, and bears himself in this way for a full year,
obtains the merits of the Mahamedha sacrifice.[497] Celestial damsels of
indescribable beauty, and whose age cannot be guessed for they are for
ever young in appearance, adorned with every ornament and with armlets of
blazing effulgence, wait upon him with many cars and follow him in his
journeys. He is waked every morning from his bed by the melodious voice
of swans, the tinkle of Nupuras, and the highly agreeable jingle of
Kanchis. Verily, he resides in a superior abode, waited upon by such
celestial damsels, for years as countless as the sands on the shores of
Ganga. That man who, keeping his senses under control, fasts for a
fortnight and takes only one meal on the sixteenth day, and bears himself
in this way for a whole year, pouring libations every day on his sacred
fire, acquires the high merits that attach to a thousand Rajasuya
sacrifices. The car he rides in is possessed of great beauty and is drawn
by swans and peacocks. Riding in such a vehicle, that is, besides,
adorned with garlands of pearls and the purest gold and graced with
bevies of celestial damsels decked with ornaments of every kind, having
one column and four arches and seven altars exceedingly auspicious,
endued with thousands of banners and echoing with the sound of music,
celestial and of celestial attributes, embellished with gems and pearls
and corals, and possessed of the effulgence of lightning, such a man
lives in heaven for a thousand Yugas, having elephants and rhinoceroses
for dragging that vehicle of his. That man who having fasted for fifteen
days takes one meal on the sixteenth day and bears himself in this way
for one whole year, acquires the merits attaching to the Soma sacrifice.
Proceeding to Heaven he lives in the company of Soma's daughters. His
body fragrant with unguents whose perfumes are as sweet as those of Soma
himself, he acquires the power of transporting himself immediately to any
place he likes. Seated on his car he is waited upon by damsels of the
most beautiful features and agreeable manners, and commands all articles
of enjoyment. The period for which he enjoys such happiness consists of
countless years.[498] That man who having fasted for sixteen days eats a
little ghee on the seventeenth day and bears himself in this way for a
whole year, pouring libations every day on his sacred fire, proceeds to
the regions of Varuna and Indra, and Rudra and the Maruts and Usanas and
Brahman himself. There he is waited upon by celestial damsels and obtains
a sight of the celestial Rishi called Bhurbhuva and grasps the whole
universe in his ken. The daughters of the deity of the deities gladden
him there. Those damsels, of agreeable manners and adorned with every
ornament, are capable of assuming two and thirty forms. As long as the
Sun and the Moon move in firmament, so long does that man of wisdom
reside in those regions of felicity, subsisting upon the succulence of
ambrosia and nectar. That man who having fasted for seventeen days eats
only one meal on the eighteenth day, and bears himself in this way for a
whole year, succeeds in grasping the seven regions, of which the universe
consist, in his ken. While performing his journeys on his car he is
always followed by a large train of cars producing the most agreeable
rattle and ridden by celestial damsels blazing with ornament and beauty.
Enjoying the greatest happiness, the vehicle he rides in is celestial and
endued with the greatest beauty. It is drawn by lions and tigers, and
produces a rattle as deep as the sound of the clouds. He lives in such
felicity for a thousand Kalpas subsisting upon the succulence of ambrosia
that is as sweet as nectar itself. That man who having fasted for
eighteen days eats only one meal on the nineteenth day and bears himself
in this way for a full year, succeeds in grasping within his ken all the
seven regions of which the universe consists. The region to which he
attains is inhabited by diverse tribes, of Apsaras and resounds with the
melodious voice of Gandharvas. The car he rides in is possessed of the
effulgence of the sun. His heart being freed from every anxiety, he is
waited upon by the foremost of celestial damsels. Decked with celestial
garlands, and possessed of beauty of form, he lives in such happiness for
millions and millions of years. That man who having fasted for nineteen
days eats only one meal on every twentieth day and bears himself in this
way for a full year, adhering all the while to truthfulness of speech and
to the observance of other (excellent) rituals, abstaining also from
meat, leading the life of a Brahmacharin, and devoted to the good of all
creatures, attains to the extensive legions, of great happiness,
belonging to the Adityas. While performing his journeys on his own car,
he is followed by a large train of cars ridden by Gandharvas and Apsaras
decked with celestial garlands and unguents. That man who having fasted
for twenty days takes a single meal on the twenty-first day and bears
himself in this way for a full year, pouring libations every day on his
sacred fire, attains to the regions of Usanas and Sakra, of the Aswins
and the Maruts, and resides there in uninterrupted happiness of great
measure. Unacquainted with sorrow of every kind, he rides in the foremost
of cars for making his journeys, and waited upon by the foremost of
celestials, damsels, and possessed of puissance, he sports in joy like a
celestial himself. That man who having fasted for one and twenty days
takes a single meal on the twenty-second day and bears himself in this
way for a full year, pouring libations on his sacred fire every day,
abstaining from injuring any creature, adhering to truthfulness of
speech, and freed from malice attains to the regions of the Vasus and
becomes endued with effulgence of the sun. Possessed of the power of
going everywhere at will, subsisting upon nectar, and riding in the
foremost of cars, his person decked with celestial ornaments, he sports
in joy in the company of celestial damsels. That man who having fasted
for two and twenty days takes a single meal on the twenty-third day and
bears himself in this way for a full year, thus regulating his diet and
keeping his senses under control, attains to the regions of the deity of
Wind, of Usanas, and of Rudra. Capable of going every where at will and
always roving at will, he is worshipped by diverse tribes of Apsaras.
Riding in the foremost of cars and his person decked with celestial
ornaments, he sports for countless years in great felicity in the company
of celestial damsels. That man who having fasted for three and twenty
days eats a little ghee on the twenty-fourth day, and bears himself in
this way for a full year, pouring libations on his sacred fire, resides
for countless years in great happiness in the regions of the Adityas, his
person decked with celestial robes and garlands and celestial perfumes
and unguents. Riding in an excellent car made of gold and possessed of
great beauty and drawn by swans, he sports in joy in the company of
thousands and thousands of celestial damsels. That man who having fasted
for four and twenty days eats a single meal on the twenty-fifth day and
bears himself thus for a full year, succeeds in obtaining a car of the
foremost kind, full of every article of enjoyment. He is followed in his
journeys by a large train of cars drawn by lions and tigers, and
producing a rattle as deep as the roar of the clouds ridden by celestial
damsels, and all made of pure gold and possessed of great beauty. Himself
riding on an excellent celestial car possessed of great beauty, he
resides in those regions for a thousand Kalpas, in the company of
hundreds of celestial damsels, and subsisting upon the succulence of
ambrosia that is sweet as nectar itself. That man who having fasted for
five and twenty days eats only one meal on the twenty-sixth day, and
bears himself thus for a full year in the observance of such a regulation
in respect of diet, keeping his senses under control, freed from
attachment (to worldly objects), and pouring libations every day on his
sacred fire,--that blessed man,--worshipped by the Apsaras, attains to
the regions of the seven Maruts and of the Vasus. When performing his
journeys he is followed by a large train of cars made of excellent
crystal and adorned with all kinds of gems, and ridden by Gandharvas and
Apsaras who show him every honour. He resides in those regions, in
enjoyment of such felicity, and endued with celestial energy, for two
thousand Yugas. That man who having fasted for six and twenty days eats a
single meal on the twenty-seventh day and bears himself in this way for a
full year, pouring libations every day on his sacred fire, acquires great
merit and proceeding to Heaven receives honours from the deities.
Residing there, he subsists on nectar, freed from thirst of every kind,
and enjoying every felicity. His soul purified of every dross and
performing his journeys on a celestial car of great beauty, he lives
there, O king, bearing himself after the manner of the celestial Rishis
and the royal sages. Possessed of great energy, he dwells there in great
happiness in the company of celestial damsels of highly agreeable
manners, for three thousand Yugas and Kalpas. That man who having fasted
for seven and twenty days eats a single meal on the twenty-eighth day and
bears himself in this way for a full year, with soul and senses under
perfect control, acquires very great merit, which, in fact, is equal to
what is acquired by the celestial Rishis. Possessed of every article of
enjoyment, and endued with great energy, he blazes with the effulgence of
the midday sun. Sportive damsels of the most delicate features and endued
with splendour of complexion, having deep bosoms, tapering thighs and
full and round hips, decked with celestial ornaments, gladden him with
their company while he rides on a delightful and excellent car possessed
of the effulgence of the sun and equipped with every article of
enjoyment, for thousands and thousands of Kalpas. That man who having
fasted for eight and twenty days eats a single meal on the twenty-ninth
day, and bears himself in this way for a full year, adhering all the
while to truthfulness of speech, attains to auspicious regions of great
happiness that are worshipped by celestial Rishis and royal sages. The
car he obtains is endued with the effulgence of the sun and the moon;
made of pure gold and adorned with every kind of gem, ridden by Apsaras
and Gandharvas singing melodiously. Thereon he is attained by auspicious
damsels adorned with celestial ornaments of every kind. Possessed of
sweet dispositions and agreeable features, and endued with great energy,
these gladden him with their company. Endued with every article of
enjoyment and with great energy, and possessed of the splendour of a
blazing fire, he shines like a celestial, with a celestial form having
every excellence. The regions he attains are those of the Vasus and the
Maruts, of the Sadhyas and the Aswins, of the Rudras and of Brahman
himself. That man who having fasted for a full month takes a single meal
on the first day of the following month and bears himself in this way for
a full year, looking on all things with an equal eye attains to the
regions of Brahman himself. There he subsists upon the succulence of
ambrosia. Endued with a form of great beauty and highly agreeable to all,
he shines with energy and prosperity like the sun himself of a thousand
rays. Devoted to Yoga and adorned with celestial robes and garlands and
smeared with celestial perfumes and unguents, he passes his time in great
happiness, unacquainted with the least sorrow. He shines on his car
attended by damsels that blaze forth with effulgence emitted by
themselves. Those damsels, the daughters of the celestial Rishis and the
Rudras, adore him with veneration. Capable of assuming diverse forms that
are highly delightful and highly agreeable, their speech is characterised
by diverse kinds of sweetness, and they are able to gladden the person
they wait upon in diverse kinds of ways. While performing his journeys,
he rides on a car that looks like the firmament itself in colour (for
subtlety of the material that compose it). In his rear are cars that look
like the moon; before him are those that resemble the clouds; on his
right are vehicles that are red; below him are those that are blue; and
above him are those that are of variegated hue. He is always adored by
those that wait upon him. Endued with great wisdom, he lives in the
region of Brahman for as many years as are measured by the drops of rain
that fall in course of a thousand years on that division of the earth
which is called Jamvudwipa. Verily, possessed of the effulgence of a
deity, he lives in that region of unalloyed felicity for as many years as
the drops of rain that fall upon the earth in the season of showers. The
man who, having fasted for a whole month, eats on the first day of the
following month, and bears himself in this way for ten years, attains to
the status of a great Rishi. He was not to undergo any change of form
while proceeding to heaven for enjoying the rewards of his acts in his
life. Verily, even this is the status to which one attains by restraining
speech, practising self-denial, subjugating wrath, sexual appetite, and
the desire to eat, pouring libations on the sacred fire, and regularly
adoring the two twilights. That man who purifies himself by the
observance of these and similar vows and practices, and who eats in this
way, becomes as stainless as ether and endued with effulgence like that
of the sun himself.[499] Such a man, O king, proceeding to haven in even
his own carnal form, enjoys all the felicity that is there like a deity
at his will.
'I have thus told thee, O chief of the Bharatas, what the excellent
ordinances are in respect of sacrifices, one after another, as dependent
upon the fruits of fasts.[500] Poor men, O son of Pritha (who are unable
to perform sacrifices) may; nevertheless, acquire the fruits thereof (by
the observance of fasts). Verily, by observing these fasts, even a poor
man may attain to the highest end, O foremost one of Bharata's race,
attending all the while, besides, to the worship of the deities and the
Brahmanas I have thus recited to thee in detail the ordinances in respect
of fasts. Do not harbour any doubt in respect of those men that are so
observant of vows, that are so heedful and pure and high-souled, that are
so freed from pride and contentions of every kind, that are endued with
such devoted understandings, and that pursue their end with such
steadiness and fixity of purpose without ever deviating from their path.'"
