SECTION CXXXIII
"Maheswara said, 'Searching your memories, excellent are the duties ye
all have recited. Listen all of you now to me as I declare some mysteries
relating to religion and duty. Only those persons whose understanding has
been set on religion and who are possessed of faith, should be instructed
in respect of those mysteries of duty and religion that are fraught with
high merits. Hear what the merits are that become his who, with heart
free from anxiety, gives food everyday, for a month, to kine and contents
himself with one meal a day throughout such period. The kine are highly
blessed. They are regarded as the most sacred of all sacred things.
Verily, it is they that are upholding the three worlds with the deities,
the Asuras, and human beings. Respectful services rendered to them are
fraught with high merit and grave consequences. That man who every day
gives food to kine advances every day in religious merit. Formerly, in
the Krita age I had expressed my approval of these creatures. Afterwards
Brahman, born of the primeval lotus, solicited me (to show kindness
towards kine).[558] It is for this reason that a bull to this day stands
as the device on my standard overhead. I always sport with kine. Hence
should kine be worshipped by all. Kine are possessed of great power. They
are givers of boons. If worshipped, they would grant boons. That person
who gives food to kine even for a single day receives from those
beneficent creatures for that act a fourth part of the merits he may win
by all his good acts in life.'"
