SECTION VIII
"Samvarta said, "There is a peak named Munjaban on the summits of the
Himalaya mountains, where the adorable Lord of Uma (Mahadeva) is
constantly engaged in austere devotional exercises. There the mighty and
worshipful god of great puissance, accompanied by his consort Uma, and
armed with his trident, surrounded by wild goblins of many sorts,
pursuing his random wish or fancy, constantly resides in the shade of
giant forest trees, or in the caves, or on the rugged peaks of the great
mountain. And there the Rudras, the Saddhyas, Viswedevas, the Vasus,
Yama, Varuna, and Kuvera with all his attendants, and the spirits and
goblins, and the two Aswins, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, the Yakshas, as
also the celestial sages, the Sun-gods, as well as the gods presiding
over the winds, and evil spirits of all sorts, worship the high-souled
lord of Uma, possessed of diverse characteristics. And there, O king, the
adorable god sports with the wild and playful followers of Kuvera,
possessed of weird and ghostly appearances. Glowing with its own
splendour, that mountain looks resplendent as the morning sun. And no
creature with his natural eyes made of flesh, can ever ascertain its
shape or configuration, and neither heat nor cold prevails there, nor
doth the sun shine nor do the winds blow. And, O king, neither doth
senility nor hunger, nor thirst, nor death, nor fear afflict any one at
that place. And, O foremost of conquerors, on all sides of that mountain,
there exist mines of gold, resplendent as the rays of the sun. And O
king, the attendants of Kuvera, desirous of doing good to him, protect
these mines of gold from intruders, with uplifted arms. Hie thee thither,
and appease that adorable god who is known by the names of Sarva, Bedha,
Rudra, Sitikantha, Surapa, Suvarcha, Kapardi, Karala, Haryyaksha, Varada,
Tryaksha, Pushnodantabhid, Vamana, Siva, Yamya, Avyaktarupa, Sadvritta,
Sankara, Kshemya, Harikesa, Sthanu, Purusha, Harinetra, Munda, Krishna,
Uttarana, Bhaskara, Sutirtha, Devadeva, Ranha, Ushnishi, Suvaktra,
Sahasraksha, Midhvan, Girisa, Prasanta, Yata, Chiravasa, Vilwadanda,
Siddha, Sarvadandadhara, Mriga, Vyadha, Mahan, Dhanesa, Bhava, Vara,
Somavaktra, Siddhamantra, Chakshu, Hiranyavahu, Ugra, Dikpati, Lelihana,
Goshtha, Shiddhamantra, Vrishnu, Pasupati, Bhutapati, Vrisha,
Matribhakta, Senani, Madhyama, Sruvahasta, Yati, Dhanwi, Bhargava, Aja,
Krishnanetra, Virupaksha, Tikshnadanshtra, Tikshna, Vaiswanaramukha,
Mahadyuti, Ananga, Sarva, Dikpati, Bilohita, Dipta, Diptaksha, Mahauja,
Vasuretas, Suvapu, Prithu, Kritivasa, Kapalmali, Suvarnamukuta, Mahadeva,
Krishna, Tryamvaka, Anagha, Krodhana, Nrisansa, Mridu, Vahusali, Dandi,
Taptatapa, Akrurakarma, Sahasrasira, Sahasra-charana, Swadha-swarupa,
Vahurupa, Danshtri, Pinaki, Mahadeva, Mahayogi, Avyaya, Trisulahasta,
Varada, Tryamvaka, Bhuvaneswara, Tripuraghna, Trinayana, Trilokesa,
Mahanja, Sarvabhuta-prabhava, Sarvabhuta-dharana, Dharanidhara, Isana,
Sankara, Sarva, Siva, Visveswara, Bhava, Umapati, Pasupati, Viswarupa,
Maheswara, Virupaksha, Dasabhuja, Vrishavadhwaja, Ugra, Sthanu, Siva,
Rudra, Sarva, Girisa, Iswara, Sitakantha, Aja, Sukra, Prithu, Prithuhara,
Vara, Viswarupa, Virupaksha, Vahurupa, Umapati, Anangangahara, Hara,
Saranya, Mahadeva, Chaturmukha. There bowing unto that deity, must thou
crave his protection. And thus, O prince, making thy submission to that
high-souled Mahadeva of great energy, shalt thou acquire that gold. And
the men who go there thus, succeed in obtaining the gold. Thus
instructed, Marutta, the son of Karandhama, did as he was advised. And
made superhuman arrangements for the performance of his sacrifice. And
artisans manufactured vessels of gold for that sacrifice. And Vrihaspati
too, hearing of the prosperity of Marutta, eclipsing that of the gods,
became greatly grieved at heart, and distressed at the thought that his
rival Samvarta should become prosperous, became sick at heart, and the
glow of his complexion left him, and his frame became emaciated. And when
the lord of the gods came to know that Vrihaspati was much aggrieved, he
went to him attended by the Immortals and addressed him thus."
