SECTION CXXV
"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, how a poor man, desirous of
achieving his own good, should bear himself after having acquired the
status of humanity and come into this region of acts that is so difficult
to attain. Tell me also what is the best of all gifts, and what should be
given under what circumstances. Tell me, O son of Ganga, who art truly
deserving of honour and worship. It behoveth thee to discourse to us on
these mysteries.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus questioned by that famous monarch, viz.,
the son of Pandu, Bhishma explained (in these words) unto that king these
high mysteries appertaining to duty.'
"Bhishma said, 'Listen to me with concentrated attention, O king, as I
explain to thee, O Bharata, these mysteries appertaining to duties, after
the same manner in which the holy Vyasa had explained them to me in days
of yore. This subject is a mystery to the very deities, O monarch. Yama
of stainless deeds, with the aid of vows well-observed and Yoga
meditation, had acquired the knowledge of these mysteries as the high
fruits of his penances.[539] What pleases what deity, what pleases the
Pitris, the Rishis, the Pramathas (associates of Mahadeva), the goddess
Sri, Chitragupta (the recording assistant of Yama), and the mighty
Elephants at the cardinal points of the compass, what constitutes the
religion of the Rishis--the religion, which has many mysteries and which
is productive of high fruits,--the merits of what are called great gifts,
and the merits that attach to all the sacrifices, he who knows these, O
sinless one, and knowing acts according to his knowledge, becomes freed
from stains if he has stains and acquires the merits indicated. Equal to
ten butchers is one oilman. Equal to ten oilmen is one drinker of
alcohol. Equal to ten drinkers of alcohol is one courtezan. Equal to ten
courtezans is a single (territorial) chief.[540] A great king is said to
be equal to half of these all. Hence, one should not accept, gifts from
these. On the other hand, one should attend to the science, that is
sacred and that has righteousness for its indications, of the aggregate
of three (viz., Religion, Wealth, and Pleasure). Amongst these, Wealth
and Pleasure are naturally attractive. Hence, one should, with
concentrated attention, listen to the sacred expositions of Religion (in
particular), for the fruits are very great of listening to the mysteries
of Religion. One should certainly hear every topic connected with
Religion as ordained by the deities themselves. In it is contained the
ritual in respect of the Sraddha in which have been declared the
mysteries connected with the Pitris. The mysteries connected with all the
deities have also been explained there. It comprehends the duties and
practices, productive of great merit, of the Rishis also, together with
the mysteries attaching to them. It contains an exposition of the merits
o f great sacrifices and those that attach to all kinds of gifts. Those
men who always read the scriptures bearing on these topics, those who
bear them properly in their mind, and he who, having listened to them,
follows them in practice, are all regarded to be as holy and sinless as
the puissant Narayana himself. The merits that attach to the gift of
kine, those that belong to the performance of ablutions in sacred waters,
those that are won by the performance of sacrifices,--all these are
acquired by that man who treats guests with reverence. They who listen to
these scriptures, they who are endued with faith, and they who have a
pure heart, it is well-known, conquer many regions of happiness. Those
righteous men who are endued with faith, become cleansed of all stains
and no sin can touch them. Such men always increase in righteousness and
succeed in attaining to heaven. Once on a time, a celestial messenger,
coming to the court of Indra of his own accord, but remaining invisible,
addressed the chief of the deities in these words, 'At the command of
those two deities who are the foremost of all physicians, and who are
endued with every desirable attribute, I have come to this place where I
behold human beings and Pitris and the deities assembled together. Why,
indeed, is sexual congress interdicted for the man who performs a Sraddha
and for him also who eats at a Sraddha (for the particular day)? Why are
three rice-balls offered separately at a Sraddha? Unto whom should the
first of those balls be offered? Unto whom should the second one be
offered? And whose has it been said is the third or remaining one? I
desire to know all this.' After the celestial messenger had said these
words connected with righteousness and duty, the deities who were seated
towards the east, the Pitris also, applauding that ranger of the sky,
began as follows.'
"The Pitris said, 'Welcome art thou, and blessings upon thee! Do thou
listen, O best of all rangers of the sky! The question thou hast asked is
a high one and fraught with deep meaning. The Pitris of that man who
indulges in sexual congress on the day he performs a Sraddha, or eats at
a Sraddha have to lie for the period of a whole month on his vital seed.
As regards the classification of the rice-balls offered at a Sraddha, we
shall explain what should be done with them one after another. The first
rice-ball should be conceived as thrown into the waters. The second ball
should be given to one of the wives to eat. The third ball should be cast
into the blazing fire. Even this is the ordinance that has been declared
in respect of the Sraddha. Even this is the ordinance that is followed in
practice according to the rites of religion. The Pitris of that man who
act according to this ordinance become gratified with him and remain
always cheerful. The progeny of such a man increases and inexhaustible
wealth always remains at his command.'
"The celestial messenger said, 'Thou hast explained the division of the
rice-balls and their consignment one after another to the three (viz.,
water, the spouse, and the blazing fire), together with the reasons
thereof.[541] Whom does that rice-tall which is consigned to the waters
reach? How does it, by being so consigned, gratify the deities and how
does it rescue the Pitris? The second ball is eaten by the spouse. That
has been laid down in ordinance. How do the Pitris of that man (whose
spouse eats the ball) become the eaters thereof? The last ball goes into
the blazing fire. How does that ball succeed in finding its way to thee,
or who is he unto whom it goes? I desire to bear this,--that is, what are
the ends attained by the rice-balls offered at Sraddhas when thus
disposed of by being cast into the water, given to the spouse, and thrown
into the blazing fire!
"The Pitris said, 'Great is this question which thou hast asked. It
involves a mystery and is fraught with wonder. We have been exceedingly
gratified with thee, O ranger of the sky! The very deities and the Munis
applaud acts done in honour of the Pitris. Even they do not know what the
certain conclusions are of the ordinances in respect of the acts done in
honour of the Pitris. Excepting the high souled, immortal, and excellent
Markandeya, that learned Brahmana of great fame, who is ever devoted to
the Pitris, none amongst them is conversant with the mysteries of the
ordinances in respect of the Pitris. Having heard from the holy Vyasa
what the end is of the three rice-balls offered at the Sraddha, as
explained by the Pitris themselves in reply to the question of the
celestial messenger, I shall explain the same to thee. Do thou hear, O
monarch, what the conclusions are with respect to the ordinances about
the Sraddha. Listen with rapt attention, O Bharata, to me as I explain
what the end is of the three rice-balls. That rice-ball which goes into
water is regarded as gratifying the deity of the moon. That deity, thus
gratified, O thou of great intelligence, gratifies in return the other
deities and the Pitris also with them. It has been laid down that the
second rice-ball should be eaten by the spouse (of the man that performs
the Sraddha). The Pitris, who are ever desirous of progeny, confer
children on the woman of the house. Listen now to me as I tell thee what
becomes of the rice-ball that is cast into the blazing fire. With that
ball the Pitris are gratified and as the result thereof they grant the
fruition of all wishes unto the person offering it. I have thus told thee
everything about the end of the three rice-balls offered at the Sraddha
and consigned to the three (viz., water, the spouse, and the fire). That
Brahmana who becomes the Ritwik at a Sraddha constitutes himself, by that
act, the Pitri of the person performing the Sraddha. Hence, he should
abstain that day from sexual intercourse with even his own spouse[542]. O
best of all rangers of the sky, the man who eats at Sraddha should bear
himself with purity for that day. By acting otherwise, one surely incurs
the faults I have indicated. It cannot be otherwise. Hence, the Brahmana
who is invited to a Sraddha for eating the offerings should eat them
after purifying himself by a bath and bear himself piously for that day
by abstaining from every kind of injury or evil. The progeny of such a
person multiply and he also who feeds him reaps the same reward.'
"Bhishma continued, 'After the Pitris said so, a Rishi of austere
penances, named Vidyutprabha, whose form shone with splendour like that
of the sun, spoke. Having heard those mysteries of religion as propounded
by the Pitris, he addressed Sakra, saying, 'Stupefied by folly, men slay
numerous creatures born in the intermediate orders, such as worms and
ants and snakes and sheep and deer and birds. Heavy is the measure of sin
they incur by these acts. What, however, is the remedy? When this
question was asked, all the gods and Rishis endued with wealth of
penances and the highly blessed Pitris, applauded that ascetic.'
"Sakra said, 'Thinking in one's mind of Kurukshetra and Gaya and Ganga
and Prabhasa and the lakes of Pushkara, one should dip one's head in
water. By so doing one becomes cleansed of all one's sins like Chandramas
freed from Rahu. One should bathe in this way for three days in
succession and then fast for every day. Besides this, one should touch
(after bathing) the back of a cow and bow one's head to her tail.
Vidyutprabha, after this, once more addressing Vasava, said, 'I shall
declare a rite that is more subtle. Listen to me, O thou of a hundred
sacrifices. Rubbed with the astringent powder of the hanging roots of the
banian and anointed with the oil of Priyangu, one should eat the
Shashtika paddy mixed with milk. By so doing one becomes cleansed of all
one's sins[543]. Listen now to another mystery unknown to many but which
was discovered by the Rishis with the aid of meditation. I heard it from
Vrihaspati while he recited it in the presence of Mahadeva. O chief of
the deities, do thou hear it with Rudra in thy company, O lord of Sachi!
If a person, ascending a mountain, stands there on one foot, with arms
upraised and joined together, and abstaining from food looks at a blazing
fire, he acquires the merits of severe penances and obtains the rewards
that attach to fasts. Heated by the rays of the sun, he becomes cleansed
of all his sins. One who acts in this way in both the summer and the
winter seasons, becomes freed from every sin. Cleansed of every sin, one
acquires a splendour of complexion for all time. Such a man blazes with
energy like the Sun or shines in beauty like the Moon!' After this, the
chief of the deities, viz., he of a hundred sacrifices, seated in the
midst of the gods, then sweetly addressed Vrihaspati, saying these
excellent words, 'O holy one, do thou duly discourse on what those
mysteries of religion are that are fraught with happiness to human
beings, and what the faults are which they commit, together with the
mysteries that attach to them!'
"Vrihaspati said, 'They who pass urine, facing the sun, they who do not
show reverence for the wind, they who do not pour libations on the
blazing fire, they who milk a cow whose calf is very young, moved by the
desire of obtaining from her as much milk as possible, commit sins. I
shall declare what those faults are, O lord of Sachi! Do thou listen to
me. The Sun, Wind, the bearer of sacrificial oblations, O Vasava, and
kine who are the mothers of all creatures, were created by the Self born
himself, for rescuing all the worlds, O Sakra! These are the deities of
human beings. Listen all of ye to the conclusions of religion. Those
wicked men and wicked women who pass urine facing the sun, live in great
infamy for six and eighty years. That man, O Sakra, who cherishes no
reverence for the wind, gets children that fall away prematurely from the
womb of his spouse. Those men who do not pour libations on the blazing
fire find that the fire, when they do ignite it for such rites as they
wish to perform, refuses to eat their libations[544]. Those men who drink
the milk of kine whose calves are very young, never get children for
perpetuating their races.[545] Such men see their children, die and their
races shrink. Even these are the consequences of the acts referred to, as
observed by regenerate persons venerable for age in their respective
races. Hence, one should always avoid that which has been interdicted,
and do only that which has been directed to be done, if one is desirous
of achieving prosperity. This that I say unto thee is very true.' After
the celestial preceptor had said this, the highly blessed deities, with
the Maruts, and the highly blessed Rishis questioned the Pitris, saying,
'Ye Pitris, at what acts of human beings, who are generally endued with
little understanding, do ye become gratified? What gifts, made in course
of such rites as are gone through for improving the position of deceased
persons in the other world, become inexhaustible in respect of their
efficacy?[546] By performing what acts can men become freed from the debt
they owe to the Pitris? We desire to hear this. Great is the curiosity we
feel.'
"The Pitris said, 'Ye highly blessed ones, the doubt existing in your
minds has been properly propounded. Listen as we declare what those acts
are of righteous men that gratify us. Bulls endued with blue complexion
should be set free. Gifts should be made to us, on the day of the new
moon, of sesame seeds and water. In the season of rains, lamps should be
lighted. By these acts of men, they can free themselves from the debt
they owe to the Pitris.[547] Such gifts never become vain. On the other
hand, they become inexhaustible and productive of high fruits. The
gratification we derive from them is regarded to be inexhaustible. Those
men who, endued with faith, beget offspring, rescue their deceased
ancestors from miserable Hell'. Hearing these words of the Pitris,
Vriddha-Gargya, possessed of wealth of penances and high energy, became
filled with wonder so that the hair on his body stood erect. Addressing
them he said, 'Ye that are all possessed of wealth of penances, tell us.
what the merits are that attach to the setting free of bulls endued with
blue complexion. What merits, again, attach to the gift of lamps in the
season of rains and the gift of water with sesame seeds?'
"The Pitris said, 'If a bull of blue complexion, upon being set free,
raises a (small) quantity of water with its tail, the Pitris (of the
person that has set that bull free) become gratified with that water for
full sixty thousand years. The mud such a bull raises with its horns from
the banks (of a river or lake), succeeds, without doubt, in sending the
Pitris (of the person that sets the animal free) to the region of Soma.
By giving lamps in the season of rains, one shines with effulgence like
Soma himself. The man who gives lamps is never subject to the attribute
of Darkness. Those men who make gifts, on the day of the new moon, of
sesame seeds and water, mixed with honey and using a vessel of copper, O
thou that art possessed of wealth of penances, are regarded as duly
performing a Sraddha with all its mysteries. These men get children of
sound health and cheerful minds. The merit acquired by the giver of the
Pinda (to the Pitris) takes the form of the growth of his race. Verily,
he who performs these acts with faith, becomes freed from the debt he
owes to the Pitris. Even thus has been laid down the proper time for the
performance of the Sraddha, the ordinance in respect of the rites to be
observed, the proper person that should be fed at the Sraddha, and the
merits that attach to it. I have declared everything to thee in due
order.'
