SECTION CXLIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having heard all the duties in their entirety and
all those sacred acts and objects that cleanse human beings of their
sins. Yudhishthira once more addressed the son of Santanu in the
"Yudhishthira said, "Who may be said to be the one god in the world? Who
may be said to be the one object which is our sole refuge? Who is he by
worshipping whom or hymning whose praises human being would get what is
beneficial? What religion is that which, according to thy judgment, is
the foremost of all religions? What are those Mantras by reciting which a
living creature becomes freed from the bonds of birth and life?'
"Bhishma said, 'One should always, with alacrity and throwing away all
languor, hymn the praises of that Lord of the universe, that god of gods
(viz., Vasudeva), who is Infinite and the foremost of all Beings, by
uttering His thousand names. By always worshipping with reverence and
devotion that immutable Being, by meditating on him, by hymning His
praises and bowing the head unto Him, and by performing sacrifices unto
Him, indeed by always praising Vishnu, who is without beginning and
without end or destruction, who is the Supreme Lord of all the worlds,
and who is the Master and Controller of the universe, one can succeed in
transcending all sorrow. Verily, He is devoted to the Brahmanas,
conversant with all duties and practices, the enhancer of the fame and
achievement of all persons, the master of all the worlds, exceedingly
wonderful, and the prime cause of the origin of all creatures. Even this,
in my judgment, is the foremost religion of all religions, viz., one
should always worship and hymn the praises of the lotus-eyed Vasudeva
with devotion. He is the highest Energy. He is the highest Penance. He is
the highest Brahma. He is the highest refuge. He is the most holy of all
holies, the most auspicious of all auspicious objects. He is the god of
all the gods and He is the immutable father of all creatures. On the
advent of the primal Yuga, all creatures spring from Him. On the
expiration, again of a Yuga, all things disappear in Him.[590] Hear, O
king, the thousand names, possessed of great efficacy in destroying sins,
of that foremost one in all the worlds that Master of the universe, viz.,
Vishnu. All those names derived from His attributes, secret and
well-known, of the high-souled Vasudeva which were sung by Rishis, I
shall recite to thee for the good of all. They are, Om! He that enters
all things, besides Himself, He that covers all things, He unto whom
sacrificial libations are poured, the Lord of the Past, the Present, and
the Future, the Creator (or Destroyer) of all existent things, the
upholder of all existent things, the Existent, the Soul of all, the
Originator of all things (I--IX); of cleansed Soul, the Supreme Soul, the
highest Refuge of all emancipated persons, the Immutable, He that lies
enclosed in a case, the Witness, He that knows the material case in which
He resides, the Indestructible (X--XVII);[591] He upon whom the mind
rests during Yoga-abstraction, the Guide or leader of all persons
conversant with Yoga, the Lord of both Pradhana (or Prakriti) and
Purusha. He that assumed a human form with a leonine head, He of handsome
features and equipments, He of beautiful hair, the foremost of Purushas
(XVIII--XXIV);[592] the embodiment of all things, the Destroyer of all
things, He that transcends the three attributes of Sattwa, Rajas and
Tamas, the Motionless, the Beginning of all things, the Receptacle into
which all things sink at the universal Dissolution, the Immutable, He who
takes birth at his own will, He who causes the acts of all living
creatures to fructify (in the form of weal or woe) the Upholder of all
things, the Source from which the primal elements have sprung, the
Puissant One, He in whom is the unbounded Lordship over all things
(XXV--XXXVII);[593] the Self-born, He that gives happiness to His
worshippers, the presiding Genius (of golden form) in the midst of the
Solar disc, the Lotus-eyed, Loud-voiced, He that is without beginning and
without end. He that upholds the universe (in the form of Ananta and
others), He that ordains all acts and their fruits, He that is superior
to the Grandsire Brahma (XXXVIII--XLVI);[594] the Immeasurable, the Lord
of the senses (or He that has curled locks), He from whose navel the
primeval lotus sprang, the Lord of all the deities, the Artificer of the
universe, the Mantra, He that weakens or emaciates all things, He that is
vast, the Ancient one, He that is enduring (XLVII--LVI).[595] He that is
incapable of being seized (by either the senses or the mind), the Eternal
One, Krishna, the Red-eyed, He that kills all creatures at the time of
the universal dissolution, He that is vast for knowledge and puissance
and other attributes of the kind, He that resides in three parts (above,
middle, and below) of every, creature. That which cleanses, is
auspicious, and high (LVII--LXIV).[596] He that urges all creatures in
respect of all their acts. He that causes the life-breaths to act. He
that causes all living creatures to live, the Eldest, the Foremost of all
those that are regarded as the Lords of all creatures, He that has gold
in his abdomen, He that has the Earth for his abdomen, the Lord of Sri or
Lakshmi, the Slayer of Madhu (LXV--LXXII)[597]: the Omnipotent, He that
is endued with great prowess, He that is armed with the bow, He that is
Possessed of a mind capable of bearing the contents of all treatises, He
that roves through the universe, riding on Garuda. He that is well suited
to the offerings made unto Him and that has the power to enjoy them
properly, the Unrivalled, He that is incapable of being discomfited, He
that knows all acts that are done, He that is identical with all acts, He
that rests on His own true self (LXXIV--LXXXIV)[598] the Lord of all the
deities, He that is the Refuge of all, the embodiment of the highest
felicity, He whose seed is the universe, He that is the source of all
things, the day (in consequence of His awakening Jiva who is steeped in
the sleep of Nescience), the Year, the Snake (owing to His being
incapable of being seized), the embodiment of Conviction, He that sees
all things (LXXXV--XCIV):[599] the Unborn, the Lord of all creatures, He
that has achieved success, He that is Success itself, He that is the
beginning of all things (in consequence of His being the cause of all
things), He that is above deterioration, He that is Righteousness in the
form of the bovine bull and the great boar that raised the submerged
Earth, He that is of immeasurable soul, He that stands aloof from all
kinds of union (XCV--CIII);[600] He that is Pauaka among the deities
called Vasus (or, He that dwells in His worshippers). He that is liberal
soul, being freed from wrath and hatred and pride and other evil
passions. Truth whose soul is equable in consequence of His thorough
impartiality, He that has been measured by His worshippers, He that is
always equal, being above all change or modification, He that never
refuses to grant the wishes of His worshippers, He whose eyes are like
the petals of the lotus, He whose acts are always characterised by
Righteousness (or He who is always engaged in granting the wishes of
those that are devoted to Him), He that is of the form of Righteousness
(CIV--CXIII); He that destroys all creatures (or their pains), the Many
headed, He that upholds the universe, He that is the source of the
universe, He who is of pure or spotless fame, the Immortal One He that is
Eternal and Fixed, He that is possessed of beautiful limbs, (or, He the
ascension unto whom is the best of all acts), He who has such knowledge
having penance for its indication that He is able to agitable Prakriti
for evolving the universe out of her (CXIV--CXXII); He that goes
everywhere (in the sense of pervading all things as their cause), the
Omniscient One, He that blazes forth in unmodified effulgence, He whose
troops are everywhere (in the form of devoted associates), (or He at
whose very sight the Danava troops are scattered in all directions). He
that is coveted (or sought) by all (or, He that grinds all His foes), He
that is the Veda, He that is conversant with the Veda, He that is
conversant with all the limbs (or branches) of the Veda, He that
represents the limbs (or branches) of the Veda (i.e., all the subsidiary
sciences), He that settles the interpretations of the Vedas, He that has
no superior in wisdom (CXXIII--CXXXIII); He that is the master of all the
worlds, He that is the master of the deities, He that is the Supervisor
of both Righteousness and Unrighteousness (for giving the fruits thereof
to those that seek the one or the other), He that is both Effect and
Cause, (or, He whose life has not been determined by acts achieved on any
previous occasion in consequence of His transcending Prakriti). He that
is four-souled (in consequence of His four forms of Aniruddha, Pradyumna,
Sankarshana and Vasudeva). He that is known by four forms (as above), He
that has four horns (which appeared on Him when He had assumed a human
form with a lion's head for slaying the Asura chief Hiranya-Kasipu), He
that has four arms (for holding the conch, discus, mace, and lotus)
(CXXXIV--CXLI); He that blazes forth in effulgence, He that is the giver
of food and cherishes those that are good; He that does not bear or put
up with those that are wicked, (or, He that puts up with the occasional
transgressions of his devotees); He that existed before the universe
started into life; He that is stainless; He that is ever victorious; He
that vanquishes the very deities; He that is the material cause of the
universe; He that repeatedly resides in material causes (CXLII--CL); He
that is the younger brother of Indra, (or He that transcends Indra in
accomplishments and attributes). He that took birth as a dwarf (from
Aditi by her husband Kasyapa in order to beguile the Asura king Vali of
the sovereignty of the three worlds, and bestow the same upon Indra who
had been dispossessed of it), He that is tall (in allusion to the vast
universal form of His which He assumed at the sacrifice of Vali for
covering Heaven, Earth, and the Nether regions with three steps of His).
He whose acts are never futile, He that cleanses (those that worship Him,
those that hear of Him and those that think of Him), He that is endued
with pre-eminent energy and strength, He that transcends Indra in all
attributes, He that accepts all His worshippers, He that is the Creation
itself in consequence of His being the Causes thereof, He that upholds
His self in the same form without being ever subject to birth, growth, or
death, He that sustains all creatures in their respective functions in
the 'universe, He that controls the hearts of all creatures (CLI--CLXII);
He that deserves to be known by those who wish to achieve what is for
their highest good; He who is the celestial physician in the form of
Dhanwantari, (or He who cures that foremost of all diseases, viz., the
bonds that bind one to the world); He that is always engaged in Yoga; He
that slays great Asuras for establishing Righteousness; He that is the
Lord of that Lakshmi who sprang from the ocean when it was churned by the
deities and the Asuras, (or, He that cherishes both the goddesses of
prosperity and learning); He that is honey (in consequence of the
pleasure He gives to those that succeed in having a taste of him); He
that transcends the senses (or is invisible to those that turn away from
Him); He that is possessed of great powers of illusion (manifested in His
beguiling Mahadeva and the deities on many occasions); He that puts forth
great energy (in achieving mighty feats); He that transcends all in might
(CLXIII--CLXXII); He that transcends all in intelligence; He that
transcends all in puissance; He that transcends all in ability; He that
discovers the universe by the effulgence emanating from his body; He
whose body is incapable of being ascertained by the eye (or any other
sense organ of knowledge); He that is possessed of every beauty; He whose
soul is incapable of being comprehended by either deities or men; He that
held on his back, in the form of the vast tortoise, the huge mountain,
Mandara, which was made the churning staff by the deities and the Asuras
when they set themselves to churn the great ocean for obtaining therefrom
all the valuables hid in its bosom; (or, He who held up the mountains of
Govardhana in the woods of Brinda for protecting the denizens of that
delightful place, who were especial objects of His kindness, from the
wrath of Indra who poured incessant showers for days together with a view
to drowning every thing) (CLXXIII--CLXXX); He that can shoot His shafts
to a great distance, piercing through obstruction of every kind; He that
raised the submerged Earth, having assumed the form of the mighty Boar;
He on whose bosom dwells the goddess of Prosperity; (or He that is
identical with Kama, the lord of Rati); He that is the Refuge of those
that are righteous; He that is incapable of being won without thorough
devotion; (or, He that is incapable of being immured or restrained by any
one putting forth his powers); He that is the delight of the deities, or,
He that is the embodiment of fullness of joy; He that rescued the
submerged Earth; (or He that understands the hymns addressed to him by
His devotees); He that is the Master of ell eloquent persons (or He that
dispels the calamities of all those who know him) (CLXXXL--CLXXXVIII); He
that is full of blazing effulgence) He that suppressed the afflictions of
His adorers; (or, He that assumes the form of Yama, the universal
Destroyer, for chastising all persons that fall away from their duties);
He that assumed the form of a Swan for communicating the Vedas to the
Grandsire Brahman; (or, He that enters into the bodies of all persons);
He that has Garuda, the prince of the feathery denizens of the welkin,
for His vehicle; He that is the foremost of snakes in consequence of His
identity with Sesha or Ananta who upholds on his head the vast Earth,
(or, He that has the hood of the prince of snakes for His bed while He
lies down to sleep on the vast expansion of water after the dissolution
of the universe); He whose navel is as beautiful as gold; He that
underwent the severest austerities in the form of Narayana at Vadari on
the breast of Himavat; He whose navel resembles a lotus; (or, He from
whose navel sprang the primeval lotus in which the Grandsire Brahma was
born); He that is the Lord of all creatures (CLXXXIX--CXCVII); He that
transcends death; (or, He that wards off Death from those that are
devoted to him); He that always casts a kind eye on His worshippers; (or,
He that sees all things in the universe); He that destroys all things;
(or, He that drenches with nectar all those that worship Him with
single-minded devotion); He that is the Ordainer of all ordainers; (or,
He that unites all persons with the consequences of their acts); He that
himself enjoys and endures the fruits of all acts, (or, He that assumed
the form of Rama, the son of Dasaratha, and going into exile at the
command of His sire made a treaty with Sugriva the chief of the Apes for
aiding him in the recovery of his kingdom from the grasp of his elder
brother Vali in return for the assistance which Sugriva promised Him for
recovering from Ravana His wife Sita who had been ravished by that
Rakshasa and borne away to his island home in Lanka), He that is always
of the same form; (or, He that is exceedingly affectionate unto His
worshippers); He that is always moving; (or, He that is of the form of
Kama who springs up in the heart of every creature); He that is incapable
of being endured by Danavas and Asuras (or, He that rescued His wife Sita
after slaying Ravana, or, He that shows compassion towards even Chandalas
and members of other low castes when they approach Him with devotion, in
allusion to His friendship, in the form of Rama, for Guhaka the chief of
the Chandalas, inhabiting the country known by the name of
Sringaverapura); He that chastises the wicked; (or, He that regulates the
conduct of all persons by the dictates of the Srutis and the Smritis); He
whose soul has true knowledge for its indication; (or, He that destroyed
Ravana, the foe of the gods, having assumed the form of Rama that was
full of compassion and other amiable virtues); He that destroys the foes
of the deities (or, He that slays those who obstruct or forbid the giving
of presents unto deserving persons) (CXCVII--CCVIII); He that is the
instructor in all sciences and the father of all; He that is the
instructor of even the Grandsire Brahma; He that is the abode or resting
place of all creatures; He that is the benefactor of those that are good
and is free from the stain of falsehood; He whose prowess is incapable of
being baffled; He that never casts his eye on such acts as are not
sanctioned or approved by the scriptures; He that casts his eye on such
acts as are sanctioned or approved by the scriptures; (or, He whose eye
never winks or sleeps); He that wears the unfading garland of victory
called by the name of Vaijayanti; He that is the Lord of speech and that
is possessed of great liberality insomuch that He rescued the lowest of
the low and the vilest of the vile by granting them His grace
(CCLX--CCXVIII); He that leads persons desirous of Emancipation to the
foremost of all conditions, viz., Emancipation itself; (or, He that
assumes the form of a mighty Fish and scudding through the vast expanse
of waters that cover the Earth when the universal dissolution comes, and
dragging the boat tied to His horns, leads Manu and others to safety); He
that is the leader of all creatures; (or, He that sports in the vast
expanse of waters which overwhelm all things at the universal
dissolution); He whose words are the Veda and who rescued the Vedas when
they were submerged in the waters at the universal dissolution; He that
is the accomplisher of all functions in the universe; He that assumes the
form of the wind for making all living creatures act or exert themselves;
(or, He whose motions are always beautiful, or, who wishes His creatures
to glorify Him); He that is endued with a thousand heads; He that is the
Soul of the universe and as such pervades all things; He that has a
thousand eyes and a thousand legs; (CCXIX--CCXXVI); He that causes the
wheel of the universe to revolve at His will; He whose soul is freed from
desire and who transcends those conditions that invest Jiva and to which
Jiva is liable; He that is concealed from the view of all persons that
are attached to the world; (or, He that has covered the eyes of all
persons with the bandage of nescience); He that grinds those that turn
away from him; He that sets the days a-going in consequence of His being
identical with the Sun; He that is the destroyer of all-destroying Time
itself; He that conveys the libations poured on the sacred fire unto
those for whom they are intended; (or, He that bears the universe,
placing it on only a minute fraction of His body); He that has no
beginning; (or, He that has no fixed habitation) He that upholds the
Earth in space (in the form of Sesha, or, rescues her in the form of the
mighty boar or supports her as a subtil pervader) (CCXXVII--CCXXXV); He
that is exceedingly inclined to grace, insomuch that He grants happiness
to even foes like Sisupala; He that has been freed from the attributes of
Rajas (passion) and Tamas (darkness) so that He is pure or stainless
Sattwa by itself; (or, He that has obtained the fruition of all His
wishes); He that supports the universe; He that feeds (or enjoys the
universe); He that is displayed in infinite puissance; He that honours
the deities, the Pitris, and His own worshippers; He that is honoured or
adored by those that are themselves honoured or adored by others; (or, He
whose acts are all beautiful and enduring); He that accomplishes the
purposes of others; (or, He that is the benefactor of others); He that
withdraws all things unto Himself at the universal dissolution; (or, He
that destroys the foes of the deities or of His worshippers); He that has
the waters for his home; (or, He that is the sole Refuge of all creatures
or He that destroys the ignorance of all creatures (CCXXXVI--CCXLVI); He
that is distinguished above all, He that cherishes the righteous, He that
cleanses all the worlds, He that crowns with fruition the desires of all
creatures, He whose wishes are always crowned with fruition, He that
gives success to all, He that bestows success upon those that solicit Him
for it (CCXLVII--CCLVI); He that presides over all sacred days; (or, He
that overwhelms Indra himself with His own excellent attributes), He that
showers all objects of desire upon His worshippers, He that walks over
all the universe, He that offers the excellent flight of steps
constituted by Righteousness (unto those that desire to ascend to the
highest place); He that has Righteousness in His abdomen; (or, He that
protects Indra even as a mother protects the child in her womb); He that
aggrandises (His worshippers), He that spreads Himself out for becoming
the vast universe, He that is aloof from all things (though pervading
them); He that is the receptacle of the ocean of Srutis (CCLVII--CCLXIV);
He that is possessed of excellent arms (i.e., arms capable of upholding
the universe); He that is incapable of being borne by any creature, He
from whom flowed the sounds called Brahman (or Veda), He that is the Lord
of all Lords of the universe, He that is the giver of wealth, He that
dwells in His own puissance, He that is multiform, He that is of vast
form, He that resides in the form of Sacrifice in all animals, He that
causes all things to be displayed (CCLXV--CCLXXIV), He that is endued
with great might, energy, and splendour; He that displays Himself in
visible forms to His worshippers, He that scorches the unrighteous with
His burning energy, He that is enriched with the sixfold attributes (of
affluence, etc.), He that imparted the Veda to the Grandsire Brahma, He
that is of the form of the Samans, Riks, and Yajuses (of the Veda); He
that soothes His worshippers burning with the afflictions of the world
like the rays of the moon cooling all living creatures of the world, He
that is endued with blazing effulgence like the sun (CCLXXV--CCLXXXII);
He from whose mind has sprung the moon, He that blazes forth in His own
effulgence, He that nourishes all creatures even like the luminary marked
by the hare, He that is the Master of the deities, He that is the great
medicine for the disease of worldly attachment, He that is the great
causeway of the universe, He that is endued with knowledge and other
attributes that are never futile and with prowess that is incapable of
being baffled (CCLXXXIII--CCLXXXIX); He that is solicited by all
creatures at all times, viz., the Past, the Present, and the Future; He
that rescues his worshippers by casting kind glances upon them, He that
sanctifies even them that are sacred; He that merges the life-breath in
the Soul; (or, He that assumes diverse forms for protecting both the
Emancipated and the Unemancipated); He that kills the desires of those
that are Emancipated; (or, He that prevents evil desires from arising in
the minds of His worshippers); He that is the sire of Kama (the principle
of desire or lust); He that is most agreeable, He that is desired by all
creatures, He that grants the fruition of all desires, He that has the
ability to accomplishing all acts (CCXC--CCXCIX); He that sets the four
Yugas to begin their course; He that causes the Yugas to continually
revolve as on a wheel, He that is endued with the diverse kinds of
illusion (and, therefore, the cause from which spring the different kinds
of acts that distinguish the different Yugas); He that is the greatest of
eaters (in consequence of His swallowing all things at the end of every
Kalpa); He that is incapable of being seized (by those that are not His
worshippers); He that is manifest (being exceedingly vast); He that
subjugates thousands of foes (of the deities); He that subjugates
innumerable foes (CCC--CCCVIII); He that is desired (by even the
Grandsire and Rudra, or He that is adored in sacrifices); He that is
distinguished above all; He that is desired by those that are endued with
wisdom and righteousness; He that has an ornament of (peacock's) feathers
on His headgear; He that stupefies all creatures with His illusion; He
that showers His grace on all His worshippers; He that kills the wrath of
the righteous; He that fills the unrighteous with wrath; He that is the
accomplisher of all acts; He who holds the universe on his arms; He that
upholds the Earth (CCCIX--CCCXVIII); He that transcends the six
well-known modifications (of inception, birth or appearance growth,
maturity, decline, and dissolution); He that is endued with great
celebrity (in consequence of His feats); He that causes all living
creatures to live (in consequence of His being the all-pervading soul);
He that gives life; the younger brother of Vasava (in the form of Upendra
or the dwarf); He that is the receptacle of all the waters in the
universe; He that covers all creatures (in consequence of His being the
material cause of everything); He that is never heedless (being always
above error); He that is established on His own glory (CCCXIX--CCCXXVII);
He that flows in the form of nectar; (or, He that dries up all things);
He upholds the path of righteousness; He that bears the burden of the
universe; He that gives desirable boons unto those that solicit them: He
that causes the winds to blow; He that is the son of Vasudeva; (or, He
that covers the universe with His illusions and sports in the midst of
it); He that is endued with extraordinary lustre; He that is the
originating cause of the deities; He that pierces all hostile towns
(CCCXXVIII--CCCXXXVI); He that transcends all sorrow and grief; He that
leads us safely across the ocean of life or the world; He that dispels
from the hearts of all His worshippers the fear of rebirth; He that is
possessed of infinite courage and prowess; He that is an offspring of
Sura's race; He that is the master of all living creatures; He that is
inclined to show His grace unto all; He that has come on earth for a
hundred times (for rescuing the good, destroying the wicked, and
establishing righteousness); He that holds a lotus in one of his hands;
He whose eyes resemble the petals of the lotus (CCCXXXVII--CCCXLVI); He
from whose navel sprang the primeval lotus; (or, He that is seated upon a
lotus); He that is endued with eyes resembling the petals of the lotus;
He that is adored by even worshippers as one seated within the lotus of
His hearts; He that assumed the form of embodied Jiva (through His own
illusion); He that is endued with puissance of every kind; He that grows
in the form of the five primal elements; the Ancient Soul; He that is
endued with vast eyes; He that has Garuda sitting on the standard of His
car (CCCXLVII--CCCCLV); He that is incomparable; the Sarabha (the
lion-killing animal); He that strikes the wicked with terror; He that
knows everything that has occurred in Time; He that accepts, in the forms
of the deities, the butter poured on the sacrificial fire; He that is
known by all kinds of evidence or proof; He upon whose breast sits
Prosperity always; He that is victorious in every battle
(CCCLVI--CCCLXIV); He that is above destruction; He that assumes a red
form; (or, becomes wrathful unto the enemies of His worshippers); He that
is an object of search with the righteous; He that is at the root of all
things; He that has the mark of the string around his abdomen (for Yasoda
had bound Him with a cord while He was Krishna); He that bears or
forgives all injuries; He that upholds the Earth in the form of her
mountains; He that is the foremost of all objects of worship; He that is
endued with great speed; He that swallows vast quantities of food
(CCCLXV--CCCLXXIV); He that caused the creation to start into life; He
that always agitates both Prakriti and Purusha; He that shines with
resplendence; (or, sports in joy); He that has puissance in his stomach;
He that is the Supreme Master of all; He that is the material out of
which the universe has been made; He that is the cause or Agent who has
made the universe: He that is independent of all things; He that ordains
variety in the universe; He that is incapable of being comprehended; He
that renders Himself invisible by the screen of illusion
(CCCLXXV--CCCLXXXV); He that is Chit divested of all attributes; He on
whom all things rest; He in whom all things reside when the universal
dissolution comes; He that assigns the foremost place to those that
worship Him; He that is durable; He that is endued with the highest
puissance; He that has been glorified in the Vedanta; He that is
contented; He that is always full; He whose glance is auspicious
(CCCLXXXVI--CCCXCV); He that fills all Yogins with delight; He that is
the end of all creatures (for it is in Him that all things merge at the
universal dissolution); He that is the faultless Path; He that in the
form of Jiva, leads to Emancipation; He that leads (Jiva to
Emancipation); He that has none to lead Him; He that is endued with great
might; He that is the foremost of all beings possessed of might; He that
uphold He that is the foremost of all Beings conversant with duty and
religion (CCCXCVI--CDIV); He that joins, at the time of creation, the
disunited elements for forming all objects; He that resides in all
bodies; He that causes all creatures to act in the form of Kshetrajna; He
that creates all creatures after destroying them at the universal
dissolution; He unto whom every one bows with reverence; He that is
extended over the entire universe; He that owns the primeval golden egg
as his abdomen (whence, as from the female uterus), everything proceeds;
He that destroys the foes of the deities; He that overspreads all things
(being the material cause whence they spring); He that spreads sweet
perfumes; He that disregards the pleasures of the senses (CDV--CDXV); He
that is identifiable with the seasons; He at whose sight alone all
worshippers succeed in obtaining the great object of their wish; He that
weakens all creatures; He that dwells in the firmament of the heart,
depending upon His own glory and puissance; He that is capable of being
known everywhere (in consequence of His omnipresence); He that inspires
everyone with dread; He in whom all creatures dwell; He that is clever in
accomplishing all acts; He that constitutes the rest of all creatures
(being, as He is, the embodiment of Emancipation); He that is endued with
competence greater than that of other Beings (CDXVI--CDXXV); He in whom
the whole Universe is spread out? He that is Himself immobile and in whom
all things rest for ever; He that is an object of proof; He that is the
Indestructible and unchanging seed; He that is sought by all (in
consequence of His being happiness); He that has no desire (in
consequence of all His desires having been gratified); He that is the
great cause (which covers the universe): He that has all sorts of things
to enjoy; He that has great wealth wherewith to secure all objects of
desire (CDXXVI--CDXXXIV); He that is above despair; He that exists in the
form of Renunciation; He that is without birth; He that is the stake unto
which Righteousness is tethered; He that is the great embodiment of
sacrifice; He who is the nave of the starry wheel that revolves in the
firmament;[601] He that is the Moon among the constellations; He that is
competent to achieve every feat; He that stays in His own soul when all
things disappear He that cherishes the desire for Creation
(CDXXXV--CDXLIV); He that is the embodiment of all sacrifices; He that is
adored in all sacrifices and religious rites; He that is the most
adorable of the deities present in the sacrifices that men perform; He
that is the embodiment of all such sacrifices in which animals are
offered up according to the ordinance; He that is adored by persons
before they take any food;[602] He that is the Refuge of those that seek
emancipation; He that beholds the acts and omissions of all creatures; He
whose soul transcends all attributes; He that is possessed of
omniscience; He that is identical with knowledge that is unacquired,
unlimited, and capable of accomplishing everything (CDXLV--CDLIV); He
that is observant of excellent vows (chief amongst which is the granting
of favour unto one that solicits it with a pure heart); He that has a
face always full of delight; He that is exceedingly subtle; He that
utters the most agreeable sounds (in the form of the Veda or as Krishna
playing on the lute); He that gives happiness (to all His worshippers);
He that does good to others without expecting any return; He that fills
all creatures with delight; He that has subdued wrath; He that has mighty
arms (so mighty that He has slain as if in sport the mightiest of
Asuras); He that tears those that are unrighteous (CDLV--CDLXIV); He that
causes those persons who are destitute of knowledge of the soul to be
steeped in the deep sleep of His illusion; He that relies on Himself
(being entirely independent of all persons and things); He that
overspreads the entire universe; He that exists in infinite forms; He
that is engaged in vocations infinite in number; He that lives in
everything; He that is full of affection towards all His worshippers; He
that is the universal father (all living creatures of the universe being
as calves sprung from Him); He that holds, in the form of the vast Ocean,
all jewels and gems in His abdomen, He that is the Lord of all treasures
(CDLXV--CDLXXIV); He that is the protector of righteousness; He that
accomplishes all the duties of righteousness; He that is the substratum
of righteousness; He that is existent for all time; He that is
non-existent (in the form of the universe, for the manifested universe is
the result of illusion); He that is destructible (in the form of the
universe); He that is indestructible as Chit; He that is, in the form of
Jiva, destitute of true knowledge; He that is, in the form of the Sun, is
endued with a thousand rays; He that ordains (even all such great and
mighty creatures as Sesha and Garuda, etc.); He that has created all the
Sastras (CDLXXV--CDLXXXV); He that exists, in the form of the Sun, as the
centre of innumerable rays of light; He that dwells in all creatures; He
that is possessed of great prowess; He that is the Master of even Yama
and others of similar puissance; He that is the oldest of the deities
(existing as He does from the beginning); He that exists in His own
glory, casting off all conditions; He that is the Lord of even all the
deities; He that is the ruler of even him that upholds the deities (viz.,
Indra) (CDLXXXVI--CDXCIII); He that transcends birth and destruction; He
that tended and protected kine (in the form of Krishna); He that
nourishes all creatures; He that is approachable by knowledge alone; He
that is Ancient; He that upholds the elements which constitute the body;
He that enjoys and endures (weal and woe, in the form of Jiva); He that
assumed the form of a vast Boar; (or, He that, in the form of Rama, was
the Lord of a large monkey host); He that gave plentiful presents unto
all in a grand sacrifice performed by Him (CDXCIV--DII); He that drinks
Soma in every sacrifice; He that drinks nectar; He that, in the form of
Soma (Chandramas), nourishes all the herbs and plants; He that conquers
foes in a trice when even they are infinite in number; He that is of
universal form and is the foremost of all existent entities; He that is
the chastiser; He that is victorious over all; He whose purposes are
incapable of being baffled; He that deserves gifts; He that gives what
His creatures have not and who protects what they have (DIII--DXII); He
that holds the life-breaths; He that beholds all His creatures as objects
of direct vision; He that never beholds anything beside His own Self; He
that gives emancipation; He whose footsteps (three in number) covered
Heaven, Earth, and the Nether regions; He who is the receptacle of all
the water; He that overwhelms all Space, all Time, and all things; He
that lies on the vast expanse of waters after the universal dissolution;
He that causes the destruction of all things (DXIII--DXXI); He that is
without birth; He that is exceedingly adorable; He that appears in His
own nature; He that has conquered all foes (in the form of wrath and
other evil passions); He that delights those that meditate on Him; He
that is joy; He that fills others with delight; He that swells with all
causes of delight; He that has truth and other virtues for His
indications; He whose foot steps are in the three worlds (DXXII--DXXX);
He that is the first of the Rishis (being conversant with the entire
Vedas); He that is identical with the preceptor Kapila; He that is the
knower of the Universe; He that is Master of the Earth; He that has their
feet; He that is the guardian of the deities; He that has large horns (in
allusion to the piscatory form in which He saved Manu on the occasion of
the universal deluge by scudding through the waters with Manu's boat tied
to His horns); He that exhausts all acts by causing their doers to enjoy
or endure their fruits; (or, He that grinds the Destroyer himself)
(DXXXI--DXXXVIII); the great Boar: He that is understood or apprehended
by the aid of the Vedanta; He that has beautiful troops (in the form of
His worshippers); He that is adorned with golden armlets; He that is
concealed (being knowledge with the aid of the Upanishads only); He that
is deep (in knowledge and puissance); He that is difficult of access; He
that transcends both word and thought, that is armed with the discus and
the mace (DXXXIX--DXLVII); the Ordainer; He that is the cause (in the
form of helper of the universe); He that has never been vanquished; He
that is the Island-born Krishna; He that is enduring (in consequence of
His transcending decay): He that mows all things and is Himself above
deterioration; the Varuna (the deity of the waters); the son of Varuna
(in the form of Vasishtha or Agastya); He that is immovable as a tree; He
that is displayed in His own true form in the lotus of the heart; He that
creates, preserves, and destroys by only a fiat of the mind
(DXLVIII--DLVIII); He that is possessed of the sixfold attributes (of
sovereignty etc.); He that destroys the sixfold attributes (at the
universal dissolution); He that is felicity (in consequence of His
swelling with all kinds of prosperity); He that is adorned with the
triumphal garland (called Vaijayanta); He that is armed with the plough
(in allusion to His incarnation as Valadeva); He that took birth from the
womb of Aditi (in the form of the dwarf that beguiled Vali); He that is
endued with effulgence like unto the Sun's; He that endures all pairs of
opposites (such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, etc.); He that is
the foremost Refuge of all things (DLIX--DLXVIII); He that is armed with
the best of bows (called Saranga); He that was divested of His battle-axe
(by Rama of Bhrigu's race);[603] He that is fierce; He that is the giver
of all objects of desire; He that is so tall as to touch the very heavens
with his head (in allusion to the form He assumed at Valis sacrifice); He
whose vision extends over the entire universe; He that is Vyasa (who
distributed the Vedas); He that is the Master of speech or all learning;
He that has started into existence without the intervention of genital
organs (DLXVIII--DLXXVI); He that is hymned with the three (foremost)
Samans; He that is the singer of the Samans; He that is the Extinction of
all worldly attachments (in consequence of His being the embodiment of
Renunciation); He that is the Medicine; He that is the Physician (who
applies the medicine); He that has ordained the fourth or last mode of
life called renunciation (for enabling His creatures to attain to
emancipation); He that causes the passions of His worshippers to be
quieted (with a view to give them tranquillity of soul); He that is
contented (in consequence of His utter dissociation with all worldly
objects); He that is the Refuge of devotion and tranquillity of Soul
(DLXXVII--DLXXXV); He that is possessed of beautiful limbs; He that is
the giver of tranquillity of soul; He that is Creator; He that sports in
joy on the bosom of the earth; He that sleeps (in Yoga) lying on the body
of the prince of snakes, Sesha, after the universal dissolution; the
Benefactor of kine; (or, He that took a human form for relieving the
earth of the weight of her population); the Master of the universe; the
Protector of the universe; He that is endued with eyes like those of the
bull; He that cherishes Righteousness with love (DLXXXVI--DXCV): He that
is the unreturning hero; He whose soul has been withdrawn from all
attachments; He that reduces to a subtle form the universe at the time of
the universal dissolution; He that does good to His afflicted
worshippers; He whose name, as soon as heard, cleanses the hearer of all
his sins; He who has the auspicious whorl on His breast; He in whom
dwells the goddess of Prosperity for ever; He who was chosen by Lakshmi
(the goddess of Prosperity) as her Lord; He that is the foremost one of
all Beings endued with prosperity (DXCVI--DCIV); He that give prosperity
unto His worshippers; the Master of prosperity; He that always lives with
those that are endued with prosperity; He that is the receptacle of all
kinds of prosperity; He that gives prosperity unto all persons of
righteous acts according to the measure of their righteousness; He that
holds the goddess of Prosperity on his bosom; He that bestows prosperity
upon those that hear of, praise, and mediate on Him; He that is the
embodiment of that condition which represents the attainment of
unattainable happiness; He that is possessed of every kind of beauty; He
that is the Refuge of the three worlds (DCV--DCXIV); He that is possessed
of beautiful eye; He that is possessed of beautiful limbs; He that is
possessed of a hundred sources of delight; He that represents the highest
delight; He that is the Master of all the luminaries in the firmament
(for it is He that maintains them in their places and orbits); He that
has subjugated His soul; He whose soul is not swayed by any superior
Being; He that is always of beautiful acts; He whose doubts have all been
dispelled (for He is said to behold the whole universe as an Amlaka in
His palm) (DCXV--DCXXIII); He that transcends all creatures; He whose
vision extends in all directions: He that has no Master; He that at all
times transcends all changes; He that (in the form of Rama) had to lie
down on that bare ground; He that adorns the earth (by His incarnations);
He that is puissance's self; He that transcends all grief; He that
dispels the griefs of all His worshippers as soon as they remember His
(DCXXIV--DCXXXII); He that is possessed of effulgence, He that is
worshipped by all; He that is the water-pot (as all things reside within
Him); He that is of pure soul; He that cleanses all as soon as they hear
of him; He that is free and unrestrained; He whose car never turns away
from battles; He that is possessed of great wealth; He whose prowess is
incapable of being measured (DCXXXIII--DCXLI); He that is the slayer of
the Asura named Kalanemi; He that is the Hero; He that has taken birth in
the race of Sura; He that is the Lord of all the deities; the soul of the
three worlds; the Master of the three worlds; He that has the solar and
lunar rays for his hair; the slayer of Kesi; He that destroys all things
(at the universal dissolution) (DCXLII--DCL); the Deity from whom the
fruition of all desires is sought; He that grants the wishes of all; He
that has desires; He that has a handsome form; He that is endued with
thorough knowledge of Srutis and Smritis; He that is possessed of a form
that is indescribable by attributes; He whose brightest rays overwhelm
heaven; He that has no end; He that (in the form of Arjuna or Nara)
acquired vast wealth on the occasion of his campaign of conquest
(DCLI--DCLX); He who is the foremost object of silent recitation, of
sacrifice, of the Vedas, and of all religious acts; He that is the
creator of penances and the like; He that is the form of (the grandsire)
Brahman, He that is the augmentor of penances; He that is conversant with
Brahma; He that is of the form of Brahmana; He that has for His limbs Him
that is called Brahma; He that knows all the Vedas and everything in the
universe; He that is always fond of Brahmanas and of whom the Brahmanas
also are fond (DCLXI--DCLXX); He whose footsteps cover vast areas; He
whose feats are mighty; He who is possessed of vast energy; He that is
identical with Vasuki, the king of the snakes; He that is the foremost of
all sacrifices; He that is Japa, that first of sacrifices; He that is the
foremost of all offerings made in sacrifices (DCLXXI--DCLXXVIII);[604] He
that is hymned by all; He that loves to be hymned (by his worshippers);
He that is himself the hymns uttered by His worshippers; He that is the
very act of hymning; He that is the person that hymns; He that is fond of
battling (with everything that is evil); He that is full in every
respect; He that fills others with every kind of affluence; He that
destroys all sins as soon as He is remembered; He whose acts are all
righteous; He that transcends all kinds of disease (DCLXXIX--DCLXXXIX);
He that is endued with the speed of the mind; He that is the creator and
promulgator of all kinds of learning; He whose vital seed is gold; He
that is giver of wealth (being identical with Kuvera the Lord of
treasures); He that takes away all the wealth of the Asuras; the son of
Vasudeva; He in whom all creatures dwell; He whose mind dwells in all
things in thorough identity with them; He that takes away the sins of all
who seek refuge in him (DCXC--DCXCVIII); He that is attainable by the
righteous; He whose acts are always good; He that is the one entity in
the universe; He that displays Himself in diverse forms; He that is the
refuge of all those that are conversant with truth; He who has the
greatest of heroes for his troops;[605] He that is the foremost of the
Yadavas; He that is the abode of the righteous He that sports in joy (in
the woods of Brinda) on the banks of Yamuna (DCXCIX--DCCVVII); He in whom
all created things dwell; the deity that overwhelms the universe with His
Maya (illusion); He in whom all foremost of Beings become merged (when
they achieve their emancipation) He whose hunger is never gratified; He
that humbles the pride of all; He that fills the righteous with just
pride; He that swells with joy; He that is incapable of being seized; He
that has never been vanquished (DCCVII--DCCXVI); He that is of universal
form; He that is of vast form; He whose form blazes forth with energy and
effulgence; He that is without form (as determined by acts); He that is
of diverse forms; (He that is unmanifest); He that is of a hundred forms;
He that is of a hundred faces (DCCXVII--DCCXXIV); He that is one; He that
is many (through illusion); He that is full of felicity; He that forms
the one grand topic of investigation; He from whom is this all; He that
is called THAT; He that is the highest Refuge; He that confines Jiva
within material causes; He that is coveted by all; He that took birth in
the race of Madhu; He that is exceedingly affectionate towards His
worshippers (DCCXXV--DCCXXXV); He that is of golden complexion; He whose
limbs are like gold (in hue); He that is possessed of beautiful limbs; He
whose person is decked with Angadas made with sandal-paste; He that is
the slayer of heroes; He that has no equal; He that is like cipher (in
consequence of no attributes being affirmable of Him); He that stands in
need of no blessings (in consequence of His fulness); He that never
swerves from His own nature and puissance and knowledge; He that is
mobile in the form of wind (DCCXXXVI--DCCXLV); He that never identifies
Himself with anything that is not-soul;[606] He that confers honours on
His worshippers; He that is honoured by all; He that is the Lord of the
three worlds; He that upholds the three worlds; He that is possessed of
intelligence and memory capable of holding in His mind the contents of
all treatises; He that took birth in a sacrifice; He that is worthy of
the highest praise; He whose intelligence and memory are never futile; He
that upholds the earth (DCCXLVI--DCCLV); He that pours forth heat in the
form of the Sun; He that is the bearer of great beauty of limbs; He that
is the foremost of all bearers of weapons; He that accepts the flowery
and leafy offerings made to Him by His worshippers; He that has subdued
all his passions and grinds all His foes; He that has none to walk before
Him; He that has four horns; He that is the elder brother of Gada
(DCCLVI--DCCLXIV); He that has four arms; He from whom the four Purushas
have sprung; He that is the refuge of the four modes of life and the four
orders of men; He that is of four souls (Mind, Understanding,
Consciousness, and Memory); He from whom spring the four objects of life,
viz., Righteousness, Wealth, Pleasure, and Emancipation; He that is
conversant with the four Vedas; He that has displayed only a fraction of
His puissance (DCCLXV--DCCLXXII); He that sets the wheel of the world to
revolve round and round; He whose soul is dissociated from all worldly
attachments; He that is incapable of being vanquished; He that cannot be
transcended; He that is exceedingly difficult of being attained; He that
is difficult of being approached; He that is difficult of access; He that
is difficult of being brought within the heart (by even Yogins); He that
slays even the most powerful foes (among the Danavas)
(DCCLXXIII--DCCLXXXI); He that has beautiful limbs; He that takes the
essence of all things in the universe; He that owns the most beautiful
warp and woof (for weaving this texture of fabric of the universe); He
that weaves with ever-extending warp and woof; He whose acts are done by
Indra; He whose acts are great; He who has no acts undone; He who has
composed all the Vedas and scriptures (DCCLXXXII--DCCLXXXIX); He whose
birth is high; He that is exceedingly handsome; He whose heart is full of
commiseration; He that has precious gems in His navel; He that has
excellent knowledge for His eye; He that is worthy of worship by Brahman
himself and other foremost ones in the universe; He that is giver of
food; He that assumed horns at the time of the universal dissolution; He
that has always subjugated His foes most wonderfully; He that knows all
things; He that is ever victorious over those that are of irresistible
prowess (DCCXC--DCCXCIX); He whose limbs are like gold; He that is
incapable of being agitated (by wrath or aversion or other passion); He
that is Master of all those who are masters of all speech; He that is the
deepest lake; He that is the deepest pit; He that transcends the
influence of Time; He in whom the primal elements are established
(DCCC--DCCCVI); He that gladdens the earth; He that grants fruits which
are as agreeable as the Kunda flowers (Jasmim pubescens, Linn); He that
gave away the earth unto Kasyapa (in His incarnation as Rama); He that
extinguishes the three kinds of misery (mentioned in the Sankhya
philosophy) like a rain-charged cloud cooling the heat of the earth by
its downpour; He that cleanses all creatures; He that has none to urge
Him; He that drank nectar; He that has an undying body; He that is
possessed of omniscience; He that has face and eyes turned towards every
direction (DCCCVIII--DCCCXVI); He that is easily won (with, that is, such
gifts as consist of flowers and leaves); He that has performed excellent
vows; He that is crowned with success by Himself; He that is victorious
over all foes; He that scorches all foes; He that is the ever-growing and
tall Banian that overtops all other trees; He that is the sacred fig tree
(Ficus glomerata, Willd); He that is the Ficus religiosa; (or, He that is
not durable, in consequence of His being all perishable forms in the
universe even as he is all the imperishable forms that exist); He that is
the slayer of Chanura of the Andhra country (DCCCXVII--DCCCXXV); He that
is endued with a thousand rays; He that has seven tongues (in the forms
of Kali, Karali, etc.); He that has seven flames (in consequence of His
being identical with the deity of fire); He that has seven horses for
bearing His vehicle; (or, He that owns the steed called Sapta); He that
is formless; He that is sinless: He that is inconceivable; He that
dispels all fears; He that destroys all fears (DCCCXXVI--DCCCXXXIV); He
that is minute; He that is gross; He that is emaciated; He that is
adipose; He that is endued with attributes; He that transcends all
attributes; He that is unseizable; He that suffers Himself to be easily
seized (by His worshippers); He that has an excellent face; He that has
for His descendants the people of the accidental regions; He that extends
the creation consisting of the fivefold primal elements
(DCCCXXXV--DCCCXLVI); He that bears heavy weights (in the form of
Ananta); He that has been declared by the Vedas; He that is devoted to
Yoga; He that is the lord of all Yogins; He that is the giver of all
wishes; He that affords an asylum to those that seek it; He that sets
Yogins to practise Yoga anew after their return to life upon the
conclusion of their life of felicity in heaven; He that invests Yogins
with puissance even after the exhaustion of their merits; He that has
goodly leaves (in the form of the Schhandas of the Vedas, Himself being
the tree of the world); He that causes the winds to blow
(DCCCXLVII--DCCCLVI); He that is armed with the bow (in the form of
Rama); He that is conversant with the science of arms; He that is the rod
of chastisement; He that is chastiser; He that executes all sentences of
chastisement; He that has never been vanquished; He that is competent in
all acts; He that sets all persons to their respective duties; He that
has none to set Him to any work; He that has no Yama to slay Him
(DCCLVII--DCCCLXVI); He that is endued with heroism and prowess; He that
has the attribute of Sattwa (Goodness); He that is identical with Truth;
He that is devoted to Truth and Righteousness; He that is sought by those
who are resolved to achieve emancipation; (or, He towards whom the
universe proceeds when the dissolution comes); He that deserves to have
all objects which His worshippers present unto Him; He that is worthy of
being adored (with hymns and flowers and other offering of reverence); He
that does good to all; He that enhances the delights of all
(DCCCLXVII--DCCCLXV); He whose track is through the firmament; He that
blazes forth in His own effulgence; He that is endued with great beauty;
He that eats the offerings made on the sacrificial fire; He that dwells
everywhere and is endued with supreme puissance; He that sucks the
moisture of the earth in the form of the Sun; He that has diverse
desires; He that brings forth all things; He that is the parent of the
universe; He that has the Sun for His eye (DCCCLXXVI--DCCCLXXXV); He that
is Infinite; He that accepts all sacrificial offerings; He that enjoys
Prakriti in the form of Mind; He that is giver of felicity; He that has
taken repeated births (for the protection of righteousness and the
righteous); He that is First-born of all existent things; He that
transcends despair (in consequence of the fruition of all His wishes); He
that forgives the righteous when they trip; He that is the foundation
upon which the universe rests; He that is most wonderful
(DCCCLXXXVI--DCCCXCV); He that is existent from the beginning of Time; He
that has been existing from before the birth of the Grandsire and others;
He that is of a tawny hue; (or, He that discovers or illumines all
existent things by His rays); He that assumed the form of the great Boar;
He that exists even when all things are dissolved; He that is the giver
of all blessings; He that creates blessings; He that is identifiable with
all blessings; He that enjoys blessings; He that is able to scatter
blessings (DCCCXXI--CMV); He that is without wrath; He that lies
ensconced in folds (in the form of the snake Sesha); (or, He that is
adorned with ear-rings); He that is armed with the discus; He that is
endued with great prowess; He whose sway is regulated by the high
precepts of the Srutis and the Smritis; He that is incapable of being
described by the aid of speech; He whom the Vedantas have striven to
express with the aid of speech; He that is the dew which cools those who
are afflicted with the three kinds of grief; He that lives in all bodies,
endued with the capacity of dispelling darkness (CMVI--CMXIV); He that is
divested of wrath; He that is well-skilled in accomplishing all acts by
thought, word, and deed; He that can accomplish all acts within the
shortest period of time; He that destroys the wicked; He that is the
foremost of all forgiving persons; He that is foremost of all persons
endued with knowledge; He that transcends all fear; He whose names and
feats, heard and recited, lead to Righteousness (CMXV--CMXXII), He that
rescues the Righteous from the tempestuous ocean of the world; He that
destroys the wicked; He that is Righteousness; He that dispels all evil
dreams; He that destroys all bad paths for leading His worshippers to the
good path of emancipation; He that protects the universe by staying in
the attribute of Sattwa; He that walks along the good path; He that is
Life; He that exists overspreading the universe (CMXXIII--CMXXXI); He
that is of infinite forms; He that is endued with infinite prosperity; He
that has subdued wrath; He that destroys the fears of the righteous; He
that gives just fruits, on every side, to sentient beings according to
their thoughts and acts; He that is immeasurable Soul; He that bestows
diverse kinds of fruits on deserving persons for their diverse acts; He
that sets diverse commands (on gods and men); He that attaches to every
act its proper fruit (CMXXXII--CMXL); He that has no beginning; He that
is the receptacle of all causes as well as of the earth; He that has the
goddess of Prosperity ever by his side; He that is the foremost of all
heroes; He that is adorned with beautiful armlets; He that produces all
creatures; He that is the original cause of the birth of all creatures;
He that is the terror of all the wicked Asuras; He that is endued with
terrible prowess (CMXLI--CMXLIX); He that is the receptacle and abode of
the five primal elements; He that gulps down His throat all creatures at
the time of the universal dissolution; He whose smile is as agreeable as
the sight of flowers; (or, He who laughs in the form of flowers); He that
is always wakeful; He that stays at the head of all creatures; He whose
conduct consists of those acts which the Righteous do; He that revives
the dead (as in the case of Parikshit and others); He that is the initial
syllable Om; He that has ordained all righteous acts (CML--CMLVIII); He
that displays the truth about the Supreme Soul; He that is the abode of
the five life-breaths and the senses; He that is the food which supports
the life of living creatures; He that causes all living creatures to live
with the aid of the life-breath called Prana; He that is the great topic
of every system of philosophy; He that is the One Soul in the universe;
He that transcends birth, decrepitude, and death (CMLIX--CMLXV); He that
rescues the universe in consequence of the sacred syllable Bhuh, Bhuvah,
Swah, and the others with which Homa offerings are made; He that is the
great rescuer; He that is the sire of all; He that is the sire of even
the Grandsire (Brahman); He that is of the form of Sacrifice; He that is
the Lord of all sacrifices (being the great deity that is adored in
them); He that is the sacrificer; He that has sacrifices for his limbs;
He that upholds all sacrifices (CMLXXVI--CMLXXXV); He that protects
sacrifices; He that has created sacrifices; He that is the foremost of
all performers of sacrifices; He that enjoys the rewards of all
sacrifices; He that causes the accomplishment of all sacrifices; He that
completes all sacrifices by accepting the full libation at the end; He
that is identical with such sacrifices as are performed without desire of
fruit; He that is the food which sustains all living creatures; He that
is also the eater of that food (CMLXXVI--CMLXXXIV); He that is Himself
the cause of His existence; He that is self-born; He that penetrated
through the solid earth (and repairing to the nether regions slew
Hiranyaksha and others); He that sings the Samans; He that is the
delighter of Devaki; He that is the creator of all; He that is the Lord
of the earth; He that is the destroyer of the sins of his worshippers
(CMLXXXV--CMXXCII); He that bears the conch (Panchajanya) in His hands;
He that bears the sword of knowledge and illusion; He that sets the cycle
of the Yugas to revolve ceaselessly; He that invests Himself with
consciousness and senses; He that is endued with the mace of the most
solid understanding. He that is armed with a car-wheel; He that is
incapable of being agitated; He that is armed with all kinds of weapons
(CMXCIII--M). Om, salutations to Him!
'Even thus have I recited to thee, without any exception, the thousand
excellent names of the high-souled Kesava whose glory should always be
sung That man who hears the names every day or who recites them every
day, never meets with any evil either here or hereafter. If a Brahmana
does this he succeeds in mastering the Vedanta; if a Kshatriya does it,
he becomes always successful in battle. A Vaisya, by doing it, becomes
possessed of affluence, while a Sudra earns great happiness. If one
becomes desirous of earning the merit of righteousness, one succeeds in
earning it (by hearing or reciting these names). If it is wealth that one
desires, one succeeds in earning wealth (by acting in this way). So also
the man who wishes for enjoyments of the senses succeeds in enjoying all
kinds of pleasures, and the man desirous of offspring acquires offspring
(by pursuing this course of conduct). That man who with devotion and
perseverance and heart wholly turned towards him, recites these thousand
names of Vasudeva every day, after having purified himself, succeeds in
acquiring great fame, a position of eminence among his kinsmen, enduring
prosperity, and lastly, that which is of the highest benefit to him
(viz., emancipation itself). Such a man never meets with fear at any
time, and acquires great prowess and energy. Disease never afflicts him;
splendour of complexion, strength, beauty, and accomplishments become
his. The sick become hale, the afflicted become freed from their
afflictions; the affrighted become freed from fear, and he that is
plunged in calamity becomes freed from calamity. The man who hymns the
praises of that foremost of Beings by reciting His thousand names with
devotion succeeds in quickly crossing all difficulties. That mortal who
takes refuge in Vasudeva and who becomes devoted to Him, becomes freed of
all sins and attains to eternal Brahma. They who are devoted to Vasudeva
have never to encounter any evil. They become freed from the fear of
birth, death, decrepitude, and disease. That man who with devotion and
faith recites this hymn (consisting of the thousand names of Vasudeva)
succeeds in acquiring felicity of soul, forgiveness of disposition,
Prosperity, intelligence, memory, and fame. Neither wrath, nor jealousy,
nor cupidity, nor evil understanding ever appears in those men of
righteousness who are devoted to that foremost of beings. The firmament
with the sun, moon and stars, the welkin, the points of the compass, the
earth and the ocean, are all held and supported by the prowess of the
high-souled Vasudeva. The whole mobile and immobile universe with the
deities, Asuras, and Gandharvas, Yakshas, Uragas and Rakshasas, is under
the sway of Krishna. The senses, mind, understanding, life, energy,
strength and memory, it has been said, have Vasudeva for their soul.
Indeed, this body that is called Kshetra, and the intelligent soul
within, that is called the knower of Kshetra, also have Vasudeva for
their soul. Conduct (consisting of practices) is said to be the foremost
of all topics treated of in the scriptures. Righteousness has conduct for
its basis. The unfading Vasudeva is said to be the lord of righteousness.
The Rishis, the Pitris, the deities, the great (primal) elements, the
metals, indeed, the entire mobile and immobile universe, has sprung from
Narayana. Yoga, the Sankhya Philosophy, knowledge, all mechanical arts,
the Vedas, the diverse scriptures, and all learning, have sprung from
Janardana. Vishnu is the one great element or substance which has spread
itself out into multifarious forms. Covering the three worlds, He the
soul of all things, enjoys them all. His glory knows no diminution, and
He it is that is the Enjoyer of the universe (as its Supreme Lord). This
hymn in praise of the illustrious Vishnu composed by Vyasa, should be
recited by that person who wishes to acquire happiness and that which is
the highest benefit (viz., emancipation). Those persons that worship and
adore the Lord of the universe, that deity who is inborn and possessed of
blazing effulgence, who is the origin or cause of the universe, who knows
on deterioration, and who is endued with eyes that are as large and
beautiful as the petals of the lotus, have never to meet with any
discomfiture.'"
