SECTION CLVI
"Bhishma said, 'Thus addressed, Arjuna remained silent. The god of wind
once more addressed him, saying, 'Hear me, O foremost one of the
Haihayas, as I narrate to thee the achievement of the high-souled Atri.
Once on a time as the gods and Danavas were fighting each other in the
dark, Rahu pierced both Surya and Soma with his arrows. The gods,
overwhelmed by darkness, began to fall before the mighty Danavas, O
foremost of kings! Repeatedly struck by the Asuras, the denizens of
heaven began to lose their strength. They then beheld the learned
Brahmana Atri, endued with wealth of penances, engaged in the observance
of austerities. Addressing that Rishi who had conquered all his senses
and in whom wrath had been extinguished, they said 'Behold, O Rishi,
these two, viz., Soma and Surya, who have both been pierced by the Asuras
with their arrows! In consequence of this, darkness has overtaken us, and
we are being struck down by the foe. We do not see the end of our
troubles! Do thou, O lord of great puissance, rescue us from this great
fear.'
"The Rishi said, 'How, indeed, shall I protect you? They answered,
saying, 'Do thou thyself become Chandramas. Do thou also become the sun,
and do thou begin to slay these robbers!' Thus solicited by them, Atri
assumed the form of the darkness-destroying Soma. Indeed, in consequence
of his agreeable disposition, he began to look as handsome and delightful
as Soma himself. Beholding that the real Soma and the real Surya had
become darkened by the shafts of the foe, Atri, assuming the forms of
those luminaries, began to shine forth in splendour over the field of
battle, aided by the puissance of his penances. Verily Atri made the
universe blaze forth in light, dispelling all its darkness. By putting
forth his puissance, he also subjugated the vast multitudes of those
enemies of the deities. Beholding those great Asuras burnt by Atri, the
gods also, protected by Atri's energy, began to despatch them quickly.
Putting forth his prowess and mastering all his energy, it was even in
this way that Atri illumined the god of day, rescued the deities, and
slew the Asuras! Even this was the feat that regenerate one, aided by his
sacred fire,--that silent reciter of Mantras, that one clad in
deer-skins,--accomplished! Behold, O royal sage, that act achieved by
that Rishi who subsisted upon fruits only! I have thus narrated to thee,
in detail, the feat of the high-souled Atri. Shall I go on! Or, will you
say anything? Is there a Kshatriya that is superior to this regenerate
Rishi?'
"Thus addressed, Arjuna remained silent. The god of wind once more spake
unto him, 'Hear, O king, the feat achieved by the high-souled Chyavana
(in days of old). Having passed his promise to the twin Aswins, Chyavana
addressed the chastiser of Paka, saying, 'Do thou make the Aswins
drinkers of Soma with all other deities!'
"Indra said, 'The Aswins have been cast away by us. How then, can they be
admitted into the sacrificial circle for drinking Soma with the others?
They are not numbered with the deities. Do not, therefore, tell us so! O
thou of great vows, we do not wish to drink Soma in the company of the As
wins. Whatever other behest thou mayst be pleased to utter, O learned
Brahmana, we are ready to accomplish.'
"Chyavana said, 'The twin Aswins shall drink Soma with all of you! Both
of them are gods, O chief of the deities, for they are the sons of Surya.
Let the gods do what I have said. By acting according to those words, the
gods will reap great advantage. By acting otherwise, evil will overtake
"Indra said, 'I shall not, O foremost of regenerate persons, drink Soma
with the Aswins! Let others drink with them as they please! As regards
myself, I dare not do it.'
"Chyavana said, 'If, O slayer of Vala, thou wilt not obey my words, thou
shalt, this very day, drink Soma with them in sacrifice, compelled by me!
"The god of wind said, 'Then Chyavana, taking the Aswins with him,
commenced a great religious rite for their benefit. The gods all became
stupefied by Chyavana with his Mantras. Beholding that feat commenced by
Chyavana, Indra became incensed with wrath. Taking up a huge mountain he
ran against that Rishi. The chief of the deities was also armed with the
thunderbolt. Then the illustrious Chyavana, endued with penances, cast an
angry glance upon Indra as he advanced. Throwing a little water at him,
he paralysed the chief of the deities with his thunderbolt and mountain.
As the result of the religious rite he had commenced, he created a
terrible Asura hostile to Indra. Made of the libations he had poured on
the sacred fire, that Asura was called Mada, of mouth gaping wide. Even
such was the Asura that the great ascetic created with the aid of
Mantras. There were a thousand teeth in his mouth, extending for a
hundred yojanas. Of terrible mien, his fangs were two hundred yojanas in
length. One of his cheeks rested on the earth and the other touched the
heavens. Indeed, all the gods with Vasava seemed to stand at the root of
that great Asura's tongue, even as fishes when they enter into the wide
open mouth of a leviathan. While standing within the mouth of Mada, the
gods held a quick consultation and then addressing Indra, said, 'Do thou
soon bend thy head in reverence unto this regenerate personage! Freed
from every scruple, we shall drink Soma with the Aswins in our company!
Then Sakra, bowing down his head unto Chyavana, obeyed his behest. Even
thus did Chyavana make the Aswins drinkers of Soma with the other gods.
Calling back Mada, the Rishi then assigned him the acts he was to do.
That Mada was commanded to take up his residence in dice, in hunting, in
drinking, and in women. Hence, O king, those men that betake themselves
to these, meet with destruction, without doubt. Hence, one should always
cast off these faults to a great distance. Thus, O king, I have narrated
to thee the feat achieved by Chyavana. Shall I go on? Or, will you say
anything in reply? Is there a Kshatriya that is higher than the Brahmana
Chyavana?'"
