SECTION II
"Vaisampayana said, "Thus addressed by the intelligent king Dhritarashtra
Yudhishthira, possessed of understanding, became calm. And then Kesava
(Krishna) accosted him,--'If a person indulges excessively in sorrow for
his departed forefathers, he grieves them. (Therefore, banishing grief),
do thou (now) celebrate many a sacrifice with suitable presents to the
priests; and do thou gratify the gods with Soma liquor, and the manes of
thy forefathers with their due food and drink. Do thou also gratify thy
guests with meat and drink and the destitute with gifts commensurate with
their desires. A person of thy high intelligence should not bear himself
thus. What ought to be known hath been known by thee; what ought to be
done, hath also been performed. And thou hast heard the duties of the
Kshatriyas, recited by Bhishma, the son of Bhagirathi, by Krishna
Dwaipayana, Narada and Vidura. Therefore thou shouldst not walk the way
of the stupid; but pursuing the course of thy forefathers, sustain the
burthen (of the empire). It is meet that a Kshatriya should attain heaven
for certain by his (own) renown. Of heroes, those that came to be slain
never shall have to turn away (from the celestial regions). Renounce thy
grief, O mighty sovereign. Verily, what hath happened was destined to
happen so. Thou canst in no wise see those that have been slain in this
war.--Having said this unto Yudhishthira, prince of the pious, the
high-spirited Govinda paused; and Yudhishthira answered him thus, 'O
Govinda, full well do I know thy fondness for me. Thou hast ever favoured
me with thy love and thy friendship. And, O holder of the mace and the
discus. O scion of Yadu's race, O glorious one, if (now) with a pleased
mind thou dost permit me to go to the ascetic's retreat in the woods,
then thou wouldst compass what is highly desired by me. Peace find I none
after having slain my grand-father, and that foremost of men, Karna, who
never fled from the field of battle. Do thou, O Janarddana, so order that
I may be freed from this heinous sin and that my mind may be purified. As
Pritha's son was speaking thus, the highly-energetic Vyasa, cognisant of
the duties of life, soothing him, spoke these excellent words, My child,
thy mind is not yet calmed; and therefore thou art again stupefied by a
childish sentiment. And wherefore, O child, do we over and over again
scatter our speech to the winds? Thou knowest duties of the Kshatriyas,
who live by warfare. A king that hath performed his proper part should
not suffer himself to be overwhelmed by sorrow. Thou hast faithfully
listened to the entire doctrine of salvation; and I have repeatedly
removed thy misgivings arising out of desire. But not paying due heed to
what I have unfolded, thou of perverse understanding hast doubtless
forgotten it clean. Be it not so. Such ignorance is not worthy of thee. O
sinless one, thou knowest all kinds, of expiation; and thou hast also
heard of the virtues of kings as well as the merits of gifts. Wherefore
then, O Bharata, acquainted with every morality and versed in all the
Agamas, art thou overwhelmed (with grief) as if from ignorance?'"
