SECTION IV
"Yudhishthira said, 'O righteous one, I am desirous of hearing the
history of that royal sage Marutta. Do thou, O Dwaipayana, relate this
unto me, O sinless one.'
"Vyasa said, 'O child, in the Krita age Manu was lord (of the Earth)
wielding the sceptre. His son was known under the name of Prasandhi.
Prasandhi had a son named Kshupa, Kshupa's son was that lord (of men),
king Ikshwaku. He, O king, had a hundred sons endowed with pre-eminent
piety. And all of them were made monarchs by king Ikshwaku. The eldest of
them, Vinsa by name became the model of bowmen. Vinsa's son, O Bharata,
was the auspicious Vivinsa. Vivinsa, O king, had five and ten sons; all
of them were powerful archers, reverencial to the Brahmanas and truthful,
gentle and ever speaking fair. The eldest brother, Khaninetra, oppressed
all his brothers. And having conquered the entire kingdom rid of all
troubles, Khaninetra could not retain his supremacy; nor were the people
pleased with him. And dethroning him, they, O foremost of monarchs,
invested his son Suvarcha with the rights of sovereignty and (having
effected this) experienced joy (in their hearts). Seeing the reverses
sustained by his site as well as his expulsion from the empire, he was
ever intent on bringing about the welfare of the people, being devoted to
the Brahmanas, speaking the truth, practising purity and restraining his
senses and thoughts. And the subjects were well pleased with that
high-minded one constant in virtue. But he being constantly engaged in
virtuous deeds, his treasures and vehicles became greatly reduced. And on
his treasury having become depleted, the feudatory princes swarming round
him began to give him trouble. Being thus oppressed by many foes while
his treasury, horses and vehicles were impoverished, the king underwent
great tribulation along with his retainers and the denizens of his
capital. Although his power waned greatly, yet the foes could not slay
the king, for his power, O Yudhishthira, was established in
righteousness. And when he had reached the extreme of misery along with
the citizens, he blew his hand (with his mouth), and from that there
appeared a supply of forces. And then he vanquished all the kings living
along the borders of his dominions. And from this circumstance O king, he
hath been celebrated as Karandhama. His son, (the first) Karandhama who
was born at the beginning of the Treta age, equalled Indra himself and
was endowed with grace, and invincible even by the immortals. At that
time all the kings were under his control; and alike by virtue of his
wealth and for his prowess, he became their emperor. In short, the
righteous king Avikshit by name, became like unto Indra himself in
heroism; and he was given to sacrifices, delight took in virtue and held
his senses under restraint. And in energy he resembled the sun and in
forbearance Earth herself; in intelligence, he was like Vrihaspati, and
in calmness the mountain Himavat himself. And that king delighted the
hearts of his subjects by act, thought, speech, self-restraint, and
forbearance. He performed hundreds of horse-sacrifices, and the potent
and learned Angira himself served him as priest. His son surpassed his
sire in the possession of good qualities. Named Marutta, that lord of
kings was righteous and o great renown, an possessed the might of ten
thousand elephants. He was like unto Vishnu's second self. Desirous of
celebrating a sacrifice, that virtuous monarch, coming to Mount Meru on
the northern side of Himavat, caused thousands of shining golden vessels
to be forged. There on a huge golden hill he performed the rites. And
goldsmiths made basins and vessels and pans and seats without number. And
the sacrificial ground was near this place. And that righteous lord of
Earth, king Marutta, along with other princes, performed a sacrifice
there.'"
