
SECTION CLXLVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then the illustrious king of Panchala, addressing
prince Yudhishthira in the form applicable to Brahmanas, cheerfully
enquired of that illustrious son of Kunti, saying, 'Are we to know you as
Kshatriyas, or Brahamanas, or are we to know you as celestials who
disguising themselves as Brahmanas are ranging the earth and come hither
for the hand of Krishna? O tell us truly, for we have great doubts! Shall
we not be glad when our doubts have been removed? O chastiser of enemies,
have the fates been propitious unto us? Tell us the truth willingly!
Truth becometh monarchs better than sacrifices and dedications of tanks.
Therefore, tell us not what is untrue. O thou of the beauty of a
celestial, O chastiser of foes, hearing thy reply I shall make
arrangements for my daughter's wedding according to the order to which ye
belong.'
"Hearing these words of Drupada, Yudhishthira answered, saying 'Be not
cheerless, O king; let joy fill thy heart! The desire cherished by thee
hath certainly been accomplished. We are Kshatriyas, O king, and sons of
the illustrious Pandu. Know me to be the eldest of the sons of Kunti and
these to be Bhima and Arjuna. By these, O king, was thy daughter won amid
the concourse of monarchs. The twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) and Kunti wait
where Krishna is. O bull amongst men, let grief be driven from thy heart,
for we are Kshatriyas. Thy daughter, O monarch, hath like a lotus been
transferred only from one lake into another. O king, thou art our revered
superior and chief refuge. I have told thee the whole truth.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing those words, the king Drupada's eyes
rolled in ecstasy. And. filled with delight the king could not, for some
moments answer Yudhishthira. Checking his emotion with great effort, that
chastiser of foes at last replied unto Yudhishthira in proper words. The
virtuous monarch enquired how the Pandavas had escaped from the town of
Varanavata. The son of Pandu told the monarch every particular in detail
of their escape from the burning palace of lac. Hearing everything that
the son of Kunti said, king Drupada censured Dhritarashtra, that ruler of
men. And the monarch gave every assurance unto Yudhishthira, the son of
Kunti. And that foremost of eloquent men then and there vowed to restore
Yudhishthira to his paternal throne.
"Then Kunti and Krishna and Bhima and Arjuna and the twins, commanded by
the king, to reside there, treated by Yajnasena with due respect. Then
king Drupada with his sons, assured by all that had happened, approaching
Yudhishthira, said, 'O thou of mighty arms, let the Kuru prince Arjuna
take with due rites, the hand of my daughter on this auspicious day, and
let him, therefore, perform the usual initiatory rites of marriage.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Drupada, the virtuous
king Yudhishthira replied, saying, 'O great king, I also shall have to
marry.' Hearing him, Drupada said, 'If it pleaseth thee, take thou the
hand of my daughter thyself with due rites. Or, give Krishna in marriage
unto whomsoever of thy brothers thou likest.' Yudhishthira said, 'Thy
daughter, O king, shall be the common wife of us all! Even thus it hath
been ordered, O monarch, by our mother. I am unmarried still, and Bhima
also is so amongst the sons of Pandu. This thy jewel of a daughter hath
been won by Arjuna. This, O king, is the rule with us; to ever enjoy
equally a jewel that we may obtain. O best of monarchs, that rule of
conduct we cannot now abandon. Krishna, therefore, shall become the
wedded wife of us all. Let her take our hands, one after another before
the fire.'
'Drupada answered, 'O scion of Kuru's race, it hath been directed that
one man may have many wives. But it hath never been heard that one woman
may have many husbands! O son of Kunti, as thou art pure and acquainted
with the rules of morality, it behoveth thee not to commit an act that is
sinful and opposed both to usage and the Vedas. Why, O prince, hath thy
understanding become so?' Yudhishthira said in reply, 'O monarch,
morality is subtle. We do not know its course. Let us follow the way
trodden by the illustrious ones of former ages. My tongue never uttered
an untruth. My heart also never turneth to what is sinful. My mother
commandeth so; and my heart also approveth of it. Therefore, O king, that
is quite conformable to virtue. Act according to it, without any
scruples. Entertain no fear, O king, about this matter.'
"Drupada said, 'O son of Kunti thy mother, and my son Dhrishtadyumna and
thyself, settle amongst yourselves as to what should be done. Tell me the
result of your deliberations and tomorrow I will do what is proper.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'After this, O Bharata, Yudhishthira, Kunti and
Dhrishtadyumna discoursed upon this matter. Just at that time, however,
the island-born (Vyasa), O monarch, came there in course of his
wanderings.'"
