SECTION XV
Janamejaya said, 'O the best of regenerate beings, when the Pandavas had
reconquered and pacified their kingdom, what did the two warriors,
Vasudeva and Dhananjaya do?
Vaisampayana said, 'O lord of the earth, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya were
highly pleased when the Pandavas had succeeded in regaining and pacifying
their dominions, and they deported themselves with great satisfaction,
like unto Indra and his consort in the celestial regions, and amidst
picturesque woodland sceneries, and tablelands of mountains, and sacred
places of pilgrimage, and lakes and rivers, they travelled with great
pleasure like the two Aswins in the Nandana garden of Indra. And, O
Bharata, the high-souled Krishna and the son of Pandu (Dhananjaya)
entering the beautiful hall of assembly at Indraprastha, whiled away
their time in great merriment. And there, O prince, they passed their
time in recounting the stirring incidents of the war, and the sufferings
of their past lives. And those two high-souled ancient sages, glad at
heart, recited the genealogy of the races of saints and gods. Then
Kesava, knowing the full import of all matters, addressed Partha in a
sweet and beautiful speech of excellent style and import. And then
Janarddana comforted the son of Pritha afflicted by the death of his
sons, and thousands of other relatives. And he of great ascetic merit and
knowing the science of all things having duly consoled him, Arjuna rested
for a while, as if a great burden had been removed from his own person.
Then Govinda (Krishna) consoling Arjuna with sweet speech addressed these
well-reasoned words to him.
Vasudeva said, 'O Arjuna, the terror of thine enemies, this whole earth
has been conquered by the king, the son of Dharma, relying on the power
of thy arms. And O the best of men, the virtuous king Yudhishthira now
enjoys the sovereignty of the earth without a rival, by the might of
Bhimasena and the twin brothers. O thou who knowest what virtue is, it
was by righteousness alone that the king has been able to regain his
kingdom free from all enemies (thorns), and it was by the action of
righteousness that king Suyodhana has been killed in battle, and, O son
of Pritha and pillar of the Kuru race, the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra,
avaricious, always rude in speech, and bent upon an unrighteous course of
conduct, having been exterminated with their followers, the king, the son
of Dharma and lord of the earth, now peaceably enjoys the entire kingdom
of the earth with thy aid, and I too, O son of Pandu, have been
pleasantly whiling away my time in thy company, amidst woodland scenes. O
terror of thine enemies, what more need I tell thee, but that where thou
and Pritha, and the king, the son of Dharma, and the mighty Bhimasena and
the two sons of Madri are, there am I attracted with exquisite delight. O
descendant of Kuru, in these delightful and sacred and heaven-like halls
of assembly a long time hath fleeted away in thy company without my
seeing Vasudeva, Valadeva and other leaders of the Vrishni race. And now
I am desirous of repairing to the city of Dwaravati. Do thou therefore, O
most valorous of men, assent to my departure. When king Yudhishthira was
smitten heavily with affliction, I with Bhishma, have recited to him many
appropriate legends suited to the occasion with a view of assuaging his
grief, and the pliant and high-minded Yudhishthira, though our sovereign
and versed in all lore paid due heed to our words. That son of Dharma
honours truth, and is grateful and righteous, therefore will his virtue
and good sense and the stability of his power always endure. And now, O
Arjuna, if it pleases thee, do thou go to that high-minded prince and
tell him of my intention to depart from this place. For, O thou of mighty
arms, even if death cometh to me, I am unwilling to do anything that may
displease him, leaving alone my going to the city of Dwaravati. O son of
Pritha and descendant of Kuru, I now tell thee truly, desiring to do only
what is good and agreeable to thee, and there can be nothing equivocal in
it in any way, that the necessity for my staying here no longer exists,
because, O Arjuna, that monarch the son of Dhritarashtra bath been slain
with his armies and attendants, and the earth, my friend, with its girdle
of seas and its mountains and woods and forests, and the kingdom of the
Kuru king filled with various gems, have passed under the sway of that
wise son of Dharma. And O foremost prince of Bharata's race, may that
virtuous prince administer the entire kingdom of the earth in
righteousness, and with the respect and approbation of numerous
high-souled Siddhas, and having his praises always extolled by the court
heralds. Do thou, O chieftain of Kuru's race, accompany me to-day to the
presence of the king, the great aggrandiser of the Kuru race, and sound
him of my intended return to Dwaraka. As Yudhishthira the high-souled
king of the Kurus always commands my love and respect, I have, O son of
Pritha, placed this my body and all the wealth that I have in my house,
at his disposal. And O prince Partha (son of Pritha), when this earth has
come under thy sway and that of the worshipful Yudhishthira of excellent
character, there no longer remains any necessity for my staying here
except for my affection for thee. And O monarch, when the redoubtable
Arjuna had been thus accosted by the noble-hearted Janarddana, he,
showing all the honours due to him, sorrowfully replied by merely saying
'be it so.'
