SECTION CXXXII
"Bhishma said, 'After this, the Grandsire Brahman, sprang from the
primeval lotus and resembling the lotus (in agreeableness and fragrance),
addressed the deities with Vasava, the lord of Sachi, at their
head,--Yonder sits the mighty Naga who is a resident of the nether
regions. Endued with great strength and energy, and with great prowess
also, his name is Renuka. He is certainly a great being. Those mighty
elephants endued with great energy and power, who hold the entire earth
with her hills, waters, and lakes should be interviewed by this Renuka at
your request. Let Renuka go to them and ask them about the mysteries of
religion or duty.--Hearing these words of the Grandsire, the deities,
with well-pleased minds commissioned (the elephant) Renuka to where those
upholders of the world are.'"
"Renuka, proceeding to where those elephants are, addressed them, saying,
'Ye mighty creatures, I have been commanded by the deities and the Pitris
to question you about the mysteries of religion and duty. I desire to
bear you discourse on that subject in detail. Ye highly blessed ones, do
ye discourse on the subject as your wisdom may dictate.'
"The (eight) elephants standing in the eight quarters said, 'On the
auspicious eighth day of the dark fortnight in the month of Karttika when
the constellation Aslesha is in the ascendant, one should make gifts of
treacle and rice. Casting aside wrath, and living on regulated diet, one
should make these offerings at a Sraddha, uttering these mantras the
while--Let Valadeva and other Nagas possessed of great strength, let
other mighty snakes of huge bodies that are indestructible and eternal,
and let all the other great snakes that have taken their birth in their
race, make Vali offerings to me for the enhancement of my strength and
energy. Verily, let my strength be as great as that of the blessed
Narayana when he raised the submerged Earth!--Uttering these mantras, one
should make Vali offerings upon an ant-hill. When the maker of day
retires to his chambers in the west, upon the ant-hill selected should
offerings be made of raw sugar and rice. The ant-hill should previously
be scattered with Gajendra flowers, Offerings should also be made of blue
cloths and fragrant unguents. If offerings are made in this way, those
beings that live in the nether regions, bearing the weight of the upper
regions upon their heads or shoulders, become well-pleased and gratified.
As regards ourselves, we also do not feel the labour of upholding the
Earth, in consequence of such offerings being made to us. Afflicted with
the burden we bear, even this is what we think (beneficial for men),
without the slightest regard for selfish concerns. Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras, by observing this rule for a full
year, fasting on each occasion, acquire great merits from such gifts. We
think that the making of such Vali offerings on the ant-hill is really
fraught with very superior merits. By making such offerings, one is
regarded as doing the duties of hospitality for a hundred years to all
the mighty elephants that exist in the three worlds.' Hearing these words
of the mighty elephants, the deities and the Pitris and the highly
blessed Rishis, all applauded Renuka."
