SECTION CX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Approaching the Kuru grandsire, venerable in years,
viz., Bhishma, who was then lying on his bed of arrows, Yudhishthira
possessed of great wisdom put the following question.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'How, O grandsire, does one acquire beauty of form
and prosperity and agreeableness of disposition? How, indeed, does one
become possessed of religious merit and wealth and pleasure? How does one
become endued with happiness?'
"Bhishma said, 'In the month of Margasirsha, when the moon comes in
conjunction with the asterism called Mula, when his two feet are united
with that very asterism, O king, when Rohini is in his calf, when his
knee-joints are in Aswini, and his shins are in the two Ashadhas, when
Phalguni makes his anus, and Krittika his waist, when his navel is in
Bhadrapada, his ocular region in. Revati, and his back on the
Dhanishthas, when Anuradha makes his belly, when with his two arms he
reaches the Visakhas, when his two hands are indicated by Hasta, when
Punarvasu, O king, makes his fingers, Aslesha his nails, when Jyeshtha is
known for his neck, when by Sravana is pointed out his ears, and his
mouth by Pushya, when Swati is said to constitute his teeth and lips,
when Satabhisha is his smile and Magha his nose, when Mrigasiras is known
to be in his eye, and Chitra in his forehead, when his head is in
Bharani, when Ardra constitutes his hair, O king, the vow called
Chandravrata should be commenced. Upon the completion of that vow, gift
of ghee should be made unto Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas. As the
fruit of that vow, one becomes possessed about knowledge. Indeed, one
becomes, in consequence of such a vow, as full (of every blessed
attribute) as the moon himself when he is at full.'"
