SECTION CXLII
"Uma said, 'Forest recluses reside in delightful regions, among the
springs and fountains of rivers, in bowers by the sides of streams and
rills, on hills and mountains, in woods and forests, and in sacred spots
full of fruits and roots. With concentrated attention and observant of
vows and rules, they dwell in such places. I desire, O Sankara, to hear
the sacred ordinances which they follow. These recluses, O god of all
gods, are persons that depend, for the protection of their bodies, upon
themselves alone.'[565]
Maheswara said, 'Do thou hear with concentrated attention what the duties
are of forest recluses. Having listened to them with one mind, O goddess,
do thou set thy heart upon righteousness. Listen then to what the acts
are that should be practised by righteous recluses crowned with success,
observant of rigid vows and rules, and residing in woods and forests.
Performing ablutions thrice a day, worshipping the Pitris and the
deities, pouring libations on the sacred fire, performing those
sacrifices and rites that go by the name of Ishti-homa, picking up the
grains of Nivara-paddy, eating fruit and roots, and using oil that is
pressed out from Inguda and castor-seeds are their duties. Having gone
through the practices of Yoga and become crowned with (ascetic) success
and freed from lust and wrath, they should seat themselves in the
attitude called Virasana. Indeed, they should reside in those places
which are inaccessible to cowards.[566] Observant of the excellent
ordinances relating to Yoga, sitting in summer in the midst of four fires
on four sides with the sun overhead, duly practising what is called
Manduka Yoga, and always seated in the attitude called Virasana, and
lying on bare rocks or the earth, these men, with hearts set upon
righteousness, must expose themselves to cold and water and fire. They
subsist upon water or air or moss. They use two pieces of stones only for
husking their corn. Some of them use their teeth only for such a purpose.
They do not keep utensils of any kind (for storing anything for the day
to come). Some of them clothe themselves with rags and barks of trees or
deer-skins. Even thus do they pass their lives for the measure of time
allotted to them, according to the ordinances (set forth in the
scriptures). Remaining in woods and forests, they wander within woods and
forests, live within them, and are always to be found within them.
Indeed, these forest recluses entering into woods and forests live within
them as disciples, obtaining a preceptor, live with him. The performance
of the rites of Homa is their duty, as also the observance of the five
sacrifices. A due observance of the rules about distribution (in respect
of time) of the fivefold sacrifices as laid down in the Vedas, devotion
to (other) sacrifices, forming the eighth, observance of the Chaturmasya,
performance of the Paurnamasya, and other sacrifices, and performance of
the daily sacrifices, are the duties of these men dissociated from wives,
freed from every attachment, and cleansed from every sin. Indeed, they
should live even thus in the forest. The sacrificial ladle and the
water-vessel are their chief wealth. They are always devoted to the three
fires. Righteous in their conduct and adhering to the path of virtue,
they attain to the highest end. These Munis, crowned with (ascetic)
success and ever devoted to the religion of Truth, attain to the highly
sacred region of Brahman or the eternal region of Soma. O auspicious
goddess, I have thus recited to thee, in brief, the outlines of the
religion that is followed by forest recluses and that has many practices
in detail.'
"Uma said, 'O holy one, O lord of all creatures, O thou that art
worshipped by all beings, I desire to hear what the religion is of those
Munis that are followers of the scriptures treating of ascetic success.
Do thou recite it to me. Residing in woods and forests and
well-accomplished in the scriptures of success, some amongst them live
and act as they like, without being restrained by particular practices;
others have wives. How, indeed, have their practices been laid down?'
"Mahadeva said, 'O goddess, the shaving of the head and the wearing of
the brown robes are the indications of those recluses that rove about in
freedom; while the indications of those that sport with wedded wives
consist in passing their nights at home. Performing ablutions there times
a day is the duty of the classes, while the Homa, with water and fruits
from the wilderness, belongs to the wedded recluses as performed by the
Rishis in general. Absorption, Yoga-meditation, and adherence to those
duties that constitute piety and that have been laid down as such (in the
scriptures and the Vedas) are some of the other duties prescribed for
them. All those duties also of which I have spoken to thee before as
appertaining to recluses residing in forests, are the duties of these
also. Indeed, if those duties are observed, they that observe them,
attain to the rewards that attach to severe penances. Those forest
recluses that lead wedded lives should confine the gratification of their
senses to these wedded wives of theirs. By indulging in sexual congress
with their wives at only those times when their seasons come, they
conform to the duties that have been laid down for them. The religion
which these virtuous men are to follow is the religion that has been laid
down and followed by the Rishis. With their eyes set upon the acquisition
of righteousness, they should never pursue any other object of desire
from a sense of unrestrained caprice. That man who makes the gift unto
all creatures of an assurance of perfect harmlessness or innocence, freed
as his soul becomes from the stain of malice or harmfulness, becomes
endued with righteousness. Verily, that person who shows compassion to
all creatures, who adopts as a vow a behaviour of perfect sincerity
towards al creatures, and who constitutes himself the soul of all
creatures, becomes endued with righteousness. A bath in all the Vedas,
and a behaviour of sincerity towards all creatures, are looked upon as
equal in point of merit; or, perhaps, the latter is a little
distinguished above the other in point of merit. Sincerity, it has been
said, is Righteousness; while insincerity or crookedness is the reverse.
That man who conducts himself with sincerity becomes endued with
Righteousness. The man who is always devoted to sincerity of behaviour,
succeeds in attaining to a residence among the deities. Hence, he who
wishes to achieve the merit of righteousness should become endued with
sincerity. Possessed of a forgiving disposition and of self-restraint,
and with wrath under complete subjection, one should transform oneself
into an embodiment of Righteousness and become freed from malice. Such a
man, who becomes devoted, besides, to the discharge of all the duties
Religion, becomes endued with the merit of Righteousness. Freed from
drowsiness and procrastination, the pious person, who adheres to the path
of Righteousness to the best of his power, and becomes possessed of pure
conduct, and who is venerable in years, comes to be regarded as equal to
Brahma himself.'
"Uma said. By what course of duties, O god, do those ascetics who are
attached to their respective retreats and possessed of wealth of
penances, succeed in becoming endued with great splendour? By what acts
again, do kings and princes who are possessed of great wealth, and others
who are destitute of wealth, succeed in obtaining high rewards? By what
acts, O god, do denizens of the forest succeed in attaining to that place
which is eternal and in adorning their persons with celestial
sandal-paste? O illustrious god of three eyes, O destroyer of the triple
city, do thou dispel this doubt of mine connected with the auspicious
subject of the observance of penances by telling everything in detail.'
"The illustrious deity said, 'Those who observe the vows relating to
fasts and restrain their senses, who abstain from injury of any kind to
any creature, and who practise truthfulness of speech, attain to success
and ascending to Heaven sport in felicity with the Gandharvas as their
companions, freed from every kind of evil. The righteous souled man who
lies down in the attitude which appertains to Manduka-Yoga, and who
properly and according to the ordinance performs meritorious acts after
having taken the Diksha, sports in felicity in the next world in the
company of the Nagas. That man who lives in the company of deer and
subsists upon such grass and vegetables as fall off from their mouths,
and who has undergone the Diksha and attends to the duties attached to
it, succeeds in attaining to Amaravati (the mansions of Indra). That man
who subsists upon the moss he gathers and the fallen leaves of trees that
he picks up, and endures all the severities of cold, attains to very high
place. That man who subsists upon either air or water, or fruits and
roots, attains in after life to the affluence that belongs to the Yakshas
and sports in felicity in the company of diverse tribes of Apsaras.
Having practised for two and ten years, according to the rites laid down
in the ordinances, the vow relating to the endurance of the five fires in
the summer season, one becomes in one's next life a king. That man who,
having observed vows with respect to food, practises penances for two and
twelve years, carefully abstaining from all interdicted food, taken at
forbidden hours, during the periods becomes in his next life a ruler of
earth.[567] That man who sits and lies on the bare ground with the cope
of the firmament alone for his shelter, observes the course of duties
that attach to Diksha, and then casts off his body by abstaining from all
food, attains to great felicity in Heaven. The rewards of one who sits
and lies down upon the bare ground (with the welkin alone for his
shelter) are said to be excellent vehicles and beds, and costly mansions
possessed of the resplendence of the moon, O lady! That man who, having
subsisted upon abstemious diet and observed diverse excellent vows, lives
depending upon his own self and then casts off his body by abstaining
from all food, succeeds in ascending to heaven and enjoying all its
felicity. That man who, having lived in entire dependence upon his own
self, observes for two and ten years the duties that appertain to Diksha,
and at last casts off his body on the great ocean, succeeds in attaining
to the regions of Varuna after death. That man who, living in entire
dependence upon his own self observes the duties that attach to Diksha
for two and ten years, and pierces his own feet with a sharp stone,
attains to the felicity of the region that belongs to the Guhyakas. He
who cultivates self with the aid of self, who frees himself from the
influence of all pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold, joy and
sorrow, etc), who is freed from every kind of attachment, and who
mentally observes for two and ten years such a course of conduct after
Diksha, attains to Heaven and enjoys every happiness with the deities as
his companions. He who lives in entire dependence upon his own self and
observes for two and ten years the duties that attach to Diksha and
finally casts off his body on the fire as an oblation to the deities,
attains to the regions of Brahman and is held in high respect there. That
regenerate man, O goddess, who having properly gone through the Diksha
keeps his senses under subjugation, and placing his Self on Self frees
himself from the sense of meum, desirous of achieving righteousness, and
sets out, without a covering for his body, after the due observance of
the duties of Diksha for two and ten years and after having placed his
sacred fire on a tree, and walks along the path that belongs to heroes
and lies down (when need for lying down comes) in the attitude of heroes,
and conducts himself always after the manner of heroes, certainly attains
to the end that is reserved for heroes.[568] Such a man repairs to the
eternal region of Sakra where he becomes crowned with the fruition of all
his wishes and where he sports in joy, his person decked with garlands of
celestial flowers and celestial perfumes. Indeed, that righteous souled
person lives happily in Heaven, with the deities as his companions. The
hero, observant of the practices of heroes and devoted to that Yoga which
belongs to heroes, living in the practice of Goodness, having renounced
everything, having undergone the Diksha and subjugated his senses, and
observing purity of both body and mind, is sure to attain to that path
which is reserved for heroes. Eternal regions of happiness are his.
Riding on a car that moves at the will of the rider, he roves through all
those happy regions as he likes. Indeed, dwelling in the region of Sakra,
that blessed person always sports in joy, freed from every calamity."
