SECTION C
"Yudhishthira said, 'How was Nahusha plunged into distress? How was he
hurled down on the earth? How, indeed, was he deprived of the sovereignty
of the gods? It behoveth thee to recite everything to me.'
"Bhishma said, 'Even thus did those two Rishis, viz., Bhrigu and Agastya,
converse with each other. I have already told thee how Nahusha, when he
first became the chief of the gods, acted in a becoming way. Verily, all
acts of human and celestial nature flowed from that high souled royal
sage! The offering of light, and all other rites of a similar kind, the
due presentation of Valis, and all rites as are performed on especially
sacred days,--all these were properly observed by the high-souled Nahusha
who had become the sovereign of the deities.[446] Pious acts are always
observed by those that are possessed of wisdom, in both the world of men
and that of the deities. Verily, O foremost of kings, if such acts are
observed, householders always succeed in acquiring prosperity and
advancement. Even such is the effect of the gift of lamps and of incense,
as also of bows and prostrations, to the deities. When food is cooked,
the first portion thereof should be offered to a Brahmana. The particular
offerings called Vali should also be presented to the household deities.
The deities become gratified with such gifts.[447] It is also well-known
that the measure of gratification which the deities derive from such
offerings is a hundred times as great as that which the householder
himself derives from making them. Persons endued with piety and wisdom
make offerings of incense and lights, accompanying them with bows and
prostrations. Such acts are always fraught with advancement and
prosperity to those that do them. Those rites which the learned go
through in course of their ablutions, and with the aid of waters,
accompanied with bows unto the gods, always contribute to the
gratification of the gods. When worshipped with proper rites, the highly
blessed Pitris, Rishis possessed of wealth of asceticism, and the
household deities, all become gratified. Filled with such ideas, Nahusha,
that great king, when he obtained the sovereignty of the deities,
observed all these rites and duties fraught with great glory. Some time
after the good fortune of Nahusha waned, and as the consequence thereof,
he disregarded all these observances and began to act in defiance of all
restraints in the manner I have already adverted to. The chief of the
deities, in consequence of his abstention from observing the ordinances
about the offers of incense and light, began to decline in energy. His
sacrificial rites and presents were obstructed by Rakshasas. It was at
this time that Nahusha yoked that foremost of Rishis, viz., Agastya, to
his car. Endued with great strength, Nahusha, smiling the while, set that
great Rishi quickly to the task, commanding him to bear the vehicle from
the banks of the Saraswati (to the place he would indicate). At this
time, Bhrigu, endued with great energy, addressed the son of Mitravaruna,
saying, 'Do thou close thy eyes till I enter into the matted locks on thy
head.' Having said this, Bhrigu of unfading glory and mighty energy
entered into the matted locks of Agastya who stood still like a wooden
post for hurling king Nahusha from the throne of Heaven. Soon after
Nahusha saw Agastya approach him for bearing his vehicle. Beholding the
lord of the deities Agastya addressed him, saying, 'Do thou yoke me to
thy vehicle without delay. To what region shall I bear thee? O lord of
the deities, I shall bear thee to the spot which thou mayst be pleased to
direct.' Thus addressed by him, Nahusha caused the ascetic to be yoked to
his vehicle. Bhrigu, who was staying within the matted locks of Agastya,
became highly pleased at this act of Nahusha. He took care not to cast
his eyes upon Nahusha. Fully acquainted with the energy which the
illustrious Nahusha had acquired in consequence of the boon which Brahman
had granted him, Bhrigu conducted himself in this way. Agastya also,
though treated by Nahusha in this way, did not give way to wrath. Then, O
Bharata, king Nahusha urged Agastya on with, his goad. The
righteous-souled Rishi did not still give way to anger. The lord of the
deities, himself giving way to anger, then struck Agastya on the head
with his left foot. When the Rishi was thus struck on the head, Bhrigu,
who was staying within Agastya's matted locks, became incensed and cursed
Nahusha of sinful soul, saying, 'Since thou hast struck with thy foot on
the head of this great Rishi, do thou, therefore, fall down on the earth,
transformed into a snake, O wretch of wicked understanding!' Thus cursed
by Bhrigu who had not been seen. Nahusha immediately became transformed
into a snake and fell down on the earth, O chief of Bharata's race! If O
monarch, Nahusha had seen Bhrigu, the latter would not then have
succeeded, by his energy, in hurling the former down on the earth. In
consequence of the various gifts that Nahusha had made, as also his
penances and religious observances though hurled down on the earth, O
king, he succeeded in retaining his memory. He then began to propitiate
Bhrigu with a view to the working out of the course. Agastya also, filled
with compassion, joined Nahusha in pacifying Bhrigu for bringing about an
end of the course. At last Bhrigu felt compassion for Nahusha and
provided' for the working out of the course.'
'Bhrigu said, 'There will appear a king (on earth) of the name of
Yudhishthira, the foremost of his race. He will rescue thee from this
curse.' Having said this, the Rishi vanished in the very sight of
Nahusha. Agastya also, of mighty energy, having thus accomplished the
business of the true Indra, that performer of a hundred sacrifices,
returned to his own asylum, worshipped by all members of the regenerate
order. Thou hast, O king, rescued Nahusha from Bhrigu's curse. Verily,
rescued by thee, he ascended to the region of Brahman in thy sight. As
regards Bhrigu, having hurled Nahusha on the earth, he went to the region
of Brahman and informed the Grandsire of it. The Grandsire, having called
Indra back, addressed the deities, saying. 'Ye deities, through the boon
I had granted him, Nahusha had obtained the sovereignty of heaven.
Deprived, however, of that sovereignty by the enraged Agastya, he has
been hurled on the earth. Ye deities, ye will not succeed in living
without a chief. Do ye, therefore, once more install Indra in the
sovereignty of Heaven.' Unto the Grandsire, O son of Pritha, who said so
unto them, the deities filled with joy, replied, saying, 'So be it!' The
divine Brahman then, O best of monarchs, installed Indra in the
sovereignty of heaven. Made once more the chief' of the deities, Vasava
began to shine in beauty and resplendence. Even this is what occurred in
days of yore through the transgression of Nahusha. In consequence,
however, of the merits he had acquired through acts of the kind I have
mentioned Nahusha succeeded in once more regaining his lost position.
Hence, when evening comes, persons leading the domestic mode of life
should give lights. The giver of lights is sure to acquire celestial
sight after death. Verily, givers of light become as resplendent as the
full moon. The giver of lights becomes endued with beauty of form and
strength for as many years as correspond with the number of twinkles for
which the lights given by him burn or blaze.'"[448]
