SECTION XIII
"Vasudeva said, "O scion of Bharata's race, salvation is not attained by
foregoing the external things (like kingdom, etc), it is only attained by
giving up things which pander to the flesh (body). The virtue and
happiness which are attainable by the person who has renounced only the
external objects, but who is at the same time engrossed by passions and
weakness of the flesh, let these be the portion of our enemies. The word
with two letters is Mrit-yu (death of the soul or perdition), and the
word with three letters is Sas-wa-ta (Brahman) or the eternal spirit. The
consciousness that this or that thing is mine, or the state of being
addicted to worldly objects is Mrityu and the absence of that feeling is
Saswatam. And these two, Brahman and Mrityu, O king, have their seats in
the souls of all creatures, and remaining unseen, they, without doubt,
wage war with each other. And if, O Bharata, it be true that no creature
is ever destroyed, then one doth not make oneself guilty of the death of
a creature by piercing (destroying) its body. What matters the world to a
man, if having acquired the sovereignty of the whole earth with its
mobile and immobile creation, he does not become attached to it, or
engrossed in its enjoyment. But the man who having renounced the world,
has taken to the life of the recluse in the forest, living on wild roots
and edibles, if such a man, O son of Pritha, has a craving for the good
things of the world, and is addicted to them, he may be said to bear
Mrityu (death) in his mouth. Do thou, O Bharata, watch and observe the
character of thy external and internal enemies, (by means of thy
spiritual vision), And the man who is able to perceive the nature of the
eternal reality is able to overreach the influence of the great fear
(perdition). Men do not look with approbation upon the conduct of those
who are engrossed in worldly desires and there is no act without having a
desire (at its root) and all (Kama) desires are, as it were, the limbs
(offshoots) of the mind. Therefore, wise men knowing this subjugate their
desires. The Yogi who holds communion with the Supreme Spirit, knows Yoga
to be the perfect way (to salvation) by reason of the practices of his
many former births. And remembering that, what the soul desires, is not
conducive to piety and virtue, but that the suppression of the desires is
at the root of all true virtue, such men do not engage in the practice of
charity, Vedic learning, asceticism and Vedic rites whose object is
attainment of worldly prosperity, ceremonies, sacrifices, religious rules
and meditation, with the motive of securing any advantage thereby. By way
of illustration of this truth, the sages versed in ancient lore, recite
these Gathas called by the name of Kamagita, do thou O Yudhishthira,
listen to the recital of them in detail. (Kama says) No creature is able
to destroy me without resorting to the proper methods (viz., subjugating
of all desires and practice of Yoga etc.) If a man knowing my power,
strive to destroy me by muttering prayers etc., I prevail over him by
deluding him with the belief that I am the subjective ego within him. If
he wish to destroy me by means of sacrifices with many presents, I
deceive him by appearing in his mind as a most virtuous creature amongst
the mobile creation, and if he wish to annihilate me by mastering the
Vedas and Vedangas, I over reach him by seeming to his mind to be the
soul of virtue amongst the immobile creation. And if the man whose
strength lies in truth, desire to overcome me by patience, I appear to
him as his mind, and thus he does not perceive my existence, and if the
man of austere religious practices, desire to destroy me by means of
asceticism, I appear in the guise of asceticism in his mind, and thus he
is prevented from knowing me, and the man of learning, who with the
object of attaining salvation desires to destroy me, I frolic and laugh
in the face of such a man intent on salvation. I am the everlasting one
without a compeer, whom no creature can kill or destroy. For this reason
thou too, O prince, divert thy desires (Kama) to Virtue, so that, by this
means, thou mayst attain what is well for thee. Do thou therefore make
preparations for the due performance of the horse sacrifice with
presents, and various other sacrifices of great splendour, and
accompanied with presents. Let not therefore grief overpower thee again,
on beholding thy friends lying slain on the battlefield. Thou canst not
see the men slain in this battle alive again. Therefore shouldst thou
perform magnificent sacrifices with presents, so that thou mayst attain
fame in this world, and reach the perfect way (hereafter)."
