SECTION CLXVI
"Janamejaya said, 'When that foremost person among the Kauravas, viz.,
Bhishma, was lying on a bed of arrows,--a bed that is always coveted by
heroes,--and when the Pandavas, were sitting around him, my great
grandsire Yudhishthira of much wisdom, heard these expositions of
mysteries with respect to the subject of duty and had all his doubts
solved. He heard also what the ordinance are that apply to the subjects
of gifts, and thus had all his doubts removed with respect to the topics
of righteousness and wealth. It behoveth thee, O learned Brahmana, to
tell me now what else did the great Pandava king do.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'When Bhishma became silent, the entire circle of
king (who were seated around him) became perfectly silent. Indeed, they
all sat motionless there, like figures painted on canvass. Then Vyasa the
son of Satyavati, having reflected for a moment, addressed the royal son
of Ganga, saying, 'O king, the Kuru chief Yudhishthira has been restored
to his own nature, along with all brothers and followers. With Krishna of
great intelligence by his side, he bends his head in reverence unto thee.
It behoveth thee to give him leave for returning to the city.' Thus
addressed by the holy Vyasa, the royal son of Santanu and Ganga dismissed
Yudhishthira and his counsellors. The royal son of Santanu, addressing
his grandson in a sweet voice, also said, 'Do thou return to the city, O
king! Let fever of thy heart be dispelled. Do thou adore the deities in
diverse sacrifices distinguished by large gifts of food and wealth, like
Yayati himself, O foremost of kings, endued with devotion and
self-restraint. Devoted to the practice of the Kshatriya order, do thou,
O son of Pritha, gratify the Pitris and the deities. Thou shalt then earn
great benefits. Indeed, let the fever of thy heart be dispelled. Do thou
gladden all thy subjects. Do thou assure them and establish peace among
all. Do thou also honour all thy well-wishers with such rewards as they
deserve! Let all thy friends and well-wishers live, depending on thee for
their means, even as birds live, depending for their means upon a
full-grown tree charged with fruit and standing on a sacred spot. When
the hour comes for my departure from this world, do thou come here, O
king. The time when I shall take leave of my body is that period when the
sun, stopping in his south-ward course, will begin to return northwards!'
The son of Kunti answered, 'So be it!' And saluted his grandsire with
reverence and then set out, with all his relatives and followers, for the
city called after the elephant. Placing Dhritarashtra at the head and
also Gandhari who was exceedingly devoted to her lord, and accompanied by
the Rishis and Kesava, as also by the citizens and the inhabitants of the
country and by his counsellors, O monarch, that foremost one of Kuru's
race entered the city named after the elephant.'"
