SECTION CXXXVIII
"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard from thee, O sire, the names of those
kings that have ascended to heaven. O thou whose power is great in the
observance of the vow of truth by following the religion of gift. How
many kinds of gift are there that should be given? What are the fruits of
the several kinds of gifts respectively? For what reasons, what kinds of
gifts, made to what persons are productive of merits? Indeed, unto what
persons should what gifts be made? For what reasons are how many kinds of
gifts to be made? I desire to hear all this in detail.'"
"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O son of Kunti, in detail to me, O sinless one as
I discourse on the subject of gifts. Indeed, I shall tell you, O Bharata,
how gifts should be made unto all the orders of men. From desire of
merit, from desire of profit, from fear, from free choice, and from pity,
gifts are made, O Bharata! Gifts, therefore, should be known to be of
five kinds. Listen now to the reasons for which gifts are thus
distributed in five classes. With mind freed from malice one should make
gifts unto Brahmanas, for by making gifts unto the one acquires fame here
and great felicity hereafter. (Such gifts are regarded as made from
desire of merit.) He is in the habit of making gifts; or he has already
made gifts to me. Hearing such words from solicitors one gives away all
kinds of wealth unto a particular solicitor. (Such gifts are regarded as
made from desire of profit.) I am not his, nor is he mine. If
disregarded, he may injure me. From such motives of fear even a man of
learning and wisdom may make gifts unto an ignorant wretch. (Such gifts
are regarded as made from fear.) This one is dear to me, I am also dear
to him. Influenced by considerations like these, a person of
intelligence, freely and with alacrity, make gifts unto a friend. (Such
gifts are regarded as made from free choice.) The person that solicits me
is poor. He is, again, gratified with a little. From considerations such
as these, one should always make gifts unto the poor, moved by pity.
(Gifts made from such considerations are regarded as made from pity.)
These are the five kinds of gift. They enhance the giver's merits and
fame. The Lord of all creatures (Brahman himself) has said that one
should always make gifts according to one's power.'"
