SECTION V
"Yudhishthira said, 'O best of speakers, how that king became so
powerful? And how, O twice-born one, did he obtain so much gold? And
where now, O reverend sire, is all his wealth? And, O ascetic, how can we
secure the same?'
"Vyasa thereupon said,--'As the numerous offspring of the Prajapati
Daksha, the Asuras and the Celestials challenged each other (to
encounter), so in the same way Angira's sons, the exceedingly energetic
Vrihaspati and the ascetic, Samvarta, of equal vows, challenged each
other, O king. Vrihaspati began to worry Samvarta again and again. And
constantly troubled by his elder brother, he, O Bharata, renouncing his
riches, went to the woods, with nothing to coyer his body save the open
sky.[4] (At that time), Vasava having vanquished and destroyed the
Asuras, and obtained the sovereignty of the celestial regions had
appointed as his priest Angira's eldest son, that best of Brahmanas,
Vrihaspati. Formerly Angira was the family-priest of king Karandhama.
Matchless among men in might, prowess and character; powerful like unto
Satakratu, righteous souled and of rigid vows, O king, he had vehicles,
and warrior, and many adherents, and superb and costly bedsteads,
produced through dint of meditation by the breath of his mouth. And by
his native virtues, the monarch had brought all the princes under his
sway. And having lived as long as he desired, he ascended to the heaven
in his corporal embodiment. And his son named Avikshit--conqueror of
foes,--righteous like unto Yayati, brought all the Earth under his
dominion. And both in merit and might the king resembled his sire. He had
a son named Marutta, endowed with energy, and resembling Vasava himself.
This earth clad in oceans; felt herself drawn towards him. He always[5]
used to defy the lord of the celestials; and O son of Pandu, Vasava also
defied Marutta. And Marutta,--master of Earth--was pure and possessed of
perfections. And in spite of his striving, Sakra could not prevail over
him. And incapable of controlling him, he riding on the horse, along with
the celestials summoning Vrihaspati, spoke to him thus, 'O Vrihaspati, if
thou wishest to do what is agreeable to me, do not perform priestly
offices for Marutta on behalf of the deities or the ancestral Manes. I
have, O Vrihaspati, obtained the sovereignty of the three worlds, while
Marutta is merely the lord of the Earth. How, O Brahmana, having acted as
priest unto the immortal king of the celestials, wilt thou unhesitatingly
perform priestly function unto Marutta subject to death? Good betide
thee! Either espouse my side or that of the monarch, Marutta or forsaking
Marutta, gladly come over to me.--Thus accosted by the sovereign of the
celestials, Vrihaspati, reflecting for a moment, replied unto the king of
the immortals. Thou art the Lord of creatures, and in thee are the worlds
established, And thou hast destroyed Namuchi, Viswarupa and Vala. Thou, O
hero, alone encompassest the highest prosperity of the celestials, and, O
slayer of Vala, thou sustainest the earth as well as the heaven. How, O
foremost of the celestials, having officiated as thy priest, shall I, O
chastiser of Paka, serve a mortal prince. Do thou listen to what I say.
Even if the god of fire cease to cause heat and warmth, or the earth
change its nature, or the sun ceases to give light, I shall never deviate
from the truth (that I have spoken).
Vaisampayana continued,--'On hearing this speech from Vrihaspati Indra
became cured of his envious feelings, and then praising him he repaired
to his own mansion.'
SECTION V
