SECTION CXLVIII
"Narada said, 'At the conclusion of Mahadeva's speech, loud roars were
heard in the firmament. Thunders bellowed, with flashes of lightening.
The welkin was enveloped with blue and thick clouds. The deity of the
clouds then poured pure water like to what he does in the season of
rains. A thick darkness set in. The points of the compass could no longer
be distinguished. Then on that delightful, sacred, and eternal breast of
that celestial mountain, the assembled Rishis no longer saw the multitude
of ghostly beings that associate with Mahadeva. Soon, however, the welkin
cleared. Some of the Rishis set out for the sacred waters. Others
returned whence they came. Verily, beholding that wonderful and
inconceivable sight, they became filled with amazement. The discourse too
between Sankara and Uma had been heard by them with the feelings. That
foremost of all Beings, of whom the high-souled Sankara spoke to us on
that mountain, art Thou. Verily, thou art identical with Eternal Brahma.
Some time also Mahadeva burnt Himavat with his energy. Thou too hast
shown us a similar sight of wonder. Indeed, we have been put in
remembrance of that fact by what we have witnessed today. O mighty-armed
Janardana, I have thus, O puissant one, recited to thee the glory of that
god of gods, viz., him that is called Kapardin or Girisa!'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by those denizens of ascetic
retreats, Krishna, the delighter of Devaki paid due honours unto all
those Rishis. Filled with delight, those Rishis once more addressed
Krishna, saying, 'O slayer of Madhu, do Thou repeatedly show Thyself to
us at all times! O puissant one, Heaven itself cannot rejoice us so much
as a right of Thyself Everything that was said by the illustrious Bhava
(regarding Thyself) is true. O crusher of foes, we have told Thee all
about that mystery. Thou art Thyself conversant with the truth of every
topic. Since, however, asked by us, it pleased Thee to ask us in return,
we have, for that reason, recited everything (about the discourse of
Bhava with Uma) to Thee for only pleasing Thee. There is nothing in the
three worlds that is unknown to Thee. Thou art fully conversant with the
birth and origin of all things, indeed, with everything that operates as
a cause (for the production of other objects). In consequence of the
lightness of our character, we are unable to bear (within ourselves the
knowledge of) any mystery (without disclosing it).[583] Indeed, in Thy
presence, O puissant one, we indulge in incoherences from the lightness
of our hearts. There is no wonderful thing that is unknown to Thee!
Whatever is on earth, and whatever is in heaven, all is known to Thee! We
take our leave of Thee, O Krishna, for returning to our respective abodes
Mayst Thou increase in intelligence and prosperity! O sire, Thou wilt
soon get a son like unto Thee or even more distinguished than Thyself. He
will be endued with great energy and splendour. He will achieve great
feats, and become possessed of puissance as great as Thine!'[584]
"Bhishma continued, 'After this, the great Rishis bowed unto that god of
gods, that scion of Yadu's race, that foremost of all Beings. They then
circumambulated Him and taking His leave, departed. As regards Narayana,
who is endued with prosperity and blazing effulgence, He returned to
Dwaraka after having duly observed that vow of His. His spouse Rukmini
conceived, and on the expiration of the tenth month a son was born of
her, possessed of heroism and honoured by all for his highly wonderful
accomplishments. He is identical with that Kama (Desire) which exists in
every creature and which pervades every existent condition. Indeed, he
moves within the hearts of both gods and Asuras. This Krishna is that
foremost of all persons. Even he, endued with the hue of the clouds is
that four-handed Vasudeva. Through affection He has attached himself to
the Pandavas, and you also, ye sons of Pandu, have attached yourselves to
Him. Achievements, Prosperity, Intelligence, and the path that leads to
heaven, are all there where this one, viz., the illustrious Vishnu of
three steps, is. He is the three and thirty gods with Indra at their
head. There is no doubt in this. He is the one Ancient God. He is the
foremost of all gods. He is the refuge of all creatures. He. is without
beginning and without destruction. He is unmanifest. He is the
high-souled slayer of Madhu. Endued with mighty energy, He has taken
birth (among men) for accomplishing the purpose of the gods. Verily, this
Madhava is the expounder of the most difficult truths relating to Profit
or Wealth, and he is also their achiever. O son of Pritha, the victory
thou hast obtained over thy enemies, thy unrivalled achievements, the
dominion thou hast acquired over the whole earth, are all due to thy side
having been taken up by Narayana. The fact of thy having got the
inconceivable Narayana for thy protector and refuge, enabled thee to
become an Adharyu (chief sacrificer) for pouring multitudes of kings as
libations on the blazing fire of battle. This Krishna was thy great
sacrificial ladle resembling the all-destroying fire that appears at the
end of the Yuga. Duryodhana, with his sons, brothers and kinsmen, was
much to be pitied inasmuch as, moved by wrath, he made war with Hari and
the wielder of Gandiva. Many sons of Diti, many foremost of Danavas, of
huge bodies and vast strength, have perished in the fire of Krishna's
discus like insects in a forest conflagration. How incapable then must
human beings be of battling against that Krishna,--human beings who, O
tiger among men, are destitute of strength and might! As regards Jaya, he
is a mighty Yogin resembling the all-destroying Yuga-fire in energy.
Capable of drawing the bow equally with both hands, he is always in the
van of fight. With his energy, O king, he has slain all the troops of
Suyodhana. Listen to me as I tell thee what Mahadeva having the bovine
bull for the device on his standard had recited unto the ascetics on the
breast of the Himavat. His utterances constitute a Purana. The
advancement of greatness, energy, strength, prowess, puissance, humility,
and lineage that are in Arjuna can come up to only a third part of the
measure in which those attributes reside in Krishna. Who is there that
can transcend Krishna in these attributes? Whether that is possible or
not, listen (and judge). There where the illustrious Krishna is, there is
unrivalled Excellence.[585] As regards ourselves, we are persons of
little understanding. Dependent upon the will of others, we are
exceedingly unfortunate. Knowingly we betook ourselves to the eternal
path of death. Thou, however, art devoted to sincerity of conduct. Having
formerly pledged thyself against taking thy kingdom, thou didst not take
it, desirous of maintaining thy pledge.[586] O king, thou makest too much
of the slaughter of thy kinsmen and friends in battle (brought about, as
thou believest, by thyself). Thou shouldst remember, however, O chastiser
of foes, that it is not right to violate a pledge.[587] All those who
have fallen on the field of battle have really been slain by Time.
Verily, all of us have been slain by Time. Time is, indeed, all-powerful.
Thou art fully conversant with the puissance of Time. Afflicted by Time,
it does not behove thee to grieve. Know that Krishna Himself, otherwise
called Hari, is that Time with blood-red eyes and with club in hand. For
these reasons, O son of Kunti, it does not behove thee to grieve for thy
(slain) kinsfolk. Be thou always free, O delighter of the Kurus, from
grief. Thou hast heard of the glory and greatness of Madhava as recited
by me. That is sufficient for enabling a good man to understand Him.
Having heard the words of Vyasa as also of Narada endued with great
intelligence, I have discoursed to thee on the adorableness of Krishna. I
have myself added; from my own knowledge, something to that discourse.
Verily, I have discoursed also on the surpassing puissance of Krishna as
recited by Mahadeva, unto that conclave of Rishis (on the breast of the
Himavat). The discourse too between Maheswara and the daughter of
Himavat, O Bharata, has been recited by me to thee. He who will bear in
mind that discourse when emanating from a foremost person, he who will
listen to it, and he who will recite it (for other people's hearing), is
sure to win what is highly beneficial. That man will find all his wishes
fulfilled. Departing from this world he will ascend to Heaven. There is
no doubt in this. That man who, desirous of obtaining what is beneficial
for himself, should devote himself to Janardana. O king of the Kurus, it
behoves thee also to always bear in mind those incidents of duty and
righteousness which were declared by Maheswara. if thou conduct thyself
according to those precepts, if thou bear the rod of chastisement
rightly, if thou protect thy subjects properly, thou mayst be sure of
attaining to heaven. It behoves thee, O king, to protect thy subjects
always according to the dictates of righteousness. The stout rod of
chastisement which the king bears has been said to be the embodiment of
his righteousness or merit.[588] Hearing this discourse, fraught with
righteousness, between Sankara and Uma, that I have recited in the
presence of this righteous conclave, one should worship with reverence
that god having the bovine bull for the device on his banner. One that
becomes even desirous of listening to that discourse should worship
Mahadeva with reverence. Verily, the person that wishes to obtain what is
beneficial for him, should adore Mahadeva with a pure heart. Even this is
the command of the faultless and high-souled Narada. Even he has
commanded such worship of the great god, O son of Pandu, do thou obey
that command of Narada. O puissant king, even these are the wonderful
incidents that occurred on the sacred breast of the Himavat respecting
Vasudeva and Sthanu, O son of Kunti. Those occurrences flowed from the
very nature of those high-souled deities. Vasudeva, accompanied by the
wielder of Gandiva, practised eternal penances in the retreat of Vadari
for ten thousand years.[589] Verily, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya, both of
eyes like lotus-petals, underwent severe austerities for the duration of
three whole Yugas. I have learnt this from Narada and Vyasa, O king. The
lotus-eyed and mighty-armed Vasudeva, while yet a child (in human form)
achieved the great feat of slaying Kansa for the relief of his kinsmen. I
do not venture, O son of Kunti, to enumerate the feats of this Ancient
and Eternal Being, O Yudhishthira. Without doubt, O son, high and great
benefits will be reaped by thee who ownest that foremost of all persons,
viz., Vasudeva, for thy friend. I grieve for the wicked Duryodhana in
respect of even the next world to which he has gone. It was for him that
the whole earth has been depopulated with her seeds and elephants.
Indeed, through the fault of Duryodhana, of Karna, of Sakuni, and of
Duhsasana numbering the fourth, that the Kurus have perished.
"Vaisampayana continued, 'While that foremost of men, viz., the son of
Ganga, addressed him in this strain, the Kuru king (Yudhishthira)
remained entirely silent in the midst of those high-souled persons (who
had assembled together for listening to the discourses of Bhishma). All
the kings with Dhritarashtra amongst them became filled with wonder upon
hearing the words of the Kuru grandsire. In their minds they worshipped
Krishna and then turned towards him with hands joined in reverence. The
Rishis also with Narada at their head, accepted and applauded the words
of Bhishma and approved of them joyfully. These were the wonderful
discourses recited by Bhishma which Pandu's son (Yudhishthira) with all
his brothers heard with joy. Some time after, when king (Yudhishthira)
saw that Ganga's son who had given away abundant wealth as presents unto
the Brahmanas in the sacrifices performed by him, had rested and become
refreshed, the intelligent king once more asked him as follows.'"
