SECTION CXXXVII
"Yudhishthira said, 'O Bharata, of the two things charity and devotion,
do thou condescend to tell me, O sire, which is the better in this world?
Do thou, by this, remove a great doubt from my mind.'
"Bhishma said, 'Do thou, listen to me as I recite the names of the
princes who having been devoted to virtue, and having cleansed their
hearts by penances and practised gifts and other acts of piety,
undoubtedly attained to the different celestial regions. The Rishi Atreya
revered by all, attained, O monarch, to the excellent celestial regions,
by imparting the knowledge of the unconditional Supreme Being to his
pupils. King Sivi, the son of Usinara, by offering the life of his dear
son, for the benefit of a Brahmana, was translated from this world to
heaven. And Pratardana, the king of Kasi, by giving his son to a
Brahmana, secured to himself unique and undying fame in this as well as
in the other world. Rantideva, the son of Sankriti, attained to the
highest heaven by duly making gifts to the high-souled Vasishtha.
Devavriddha too went to heaven by giving a hundred-ribbed and excellent
golden umbrella to a Brahmana for a sacrifice. The worshipful Amvarisha
too has attained to the region of the gods, by making a gift of all his
kingdom to a Brahmana of great power. King Janamejaya of the solar race,
went to the highest heaven by making a gift of ear-rings, fine vehicles,
and cows to Brahmanas. The Royal sage Vrishadarbhi went to heaven by
making gifts of various jewels and beautiful houses to Brahmanas. King
Nimi of Vidarva, attained to heaven with his sons, friends and cattle, by
giving his daughter and kingdom to the high-souled Agastya. The far-famed
Rama, the son of Jamadagni, attained to the eternal regions, far beyond
his expectation, by giving lands to Brahmanas. Vasishtha, the prince of
Brahmanas, preserved all the creatures at a time of great drought when
the god Parjjanya did not bestow his grateful showers upon the earth, and
for this act he has secured eternal bliss for himself. Rama, the son of
Dasaratha, whose fame is very high in this world, attained to the eternal
regions by making gifts of wealth at sacrifices. The far-famed royal sage
Kakshasena, went to heaven by duly making over to the high-souled
Vasishtha the wealth which he had deposited with him. Marutta, the son of
Parikshita and the grandson of Karandhama, by giving his daughter in
marriage to Angiras, immediately went to heaven. The highly devout king
of Panchalal Brahmadatta, attained the blessed way by giving away a
precious conch-shell. King Mitrasaha, by giving his favourite wife
Madayanti to the high-souled Vasishtha, ascended to heaven. Sudyumna, the
son of Manu, by causing the proper punishment to be inflicted upon the
high-souled Likhita, attained to the most blessed regions. The celebrated
royal sage Saharachitta went to the blessed regions, by sacrificing his
dear life for the sake of a Brahmana. The king Satadyumna went to heaven
by giving to Maudgaya a golden mansion replete with all the objects of
desire. In ancient times, king Sumanyu by giving to Sandilya heaps of
food looking like a hill, proceeded to heaven. The Salwa prince Dyutimat
of great splendour attained to the highest regions by giving his kingdom
to Richika. The Royal sage Madiraswa by giving his slender-waisted
daughter to Hiranyahasta went to the region of the gods. The lordly
Lomapada attained all the vast objects of his desire by giving his
daughter Santa in marriage to Rishyasringa. The royal sage Bhagiratha, by
giving his famous daughter Hansi in marriage to Kautsa, went to the
eternal regions. King Bhagiratha by giving hundreds and thousands of kine
with their young ones to Kohala attained to the most blessed regions.
These and many other men, O Yudhishthira, have attained to heaven, by the
merit of their charities and penances and they have also returned from
thence again and again. Their fame will endure as long as the world will
last. I have related to thee, O Yudhishthira, this story of those good
householders who have attained to eternal regions by dint of their
charities and penances. By their charities and by performing sacrifices
and by procreating offspring, these people have attained to the heavenly
regions. O foremost scion of Kuru's race, by always performing acts of
charity, these men applied their virtuous intellects to the performance
of sacrifices and charities. O mighty prince, as night has approached I
shall explain to thee in the morning whatever doubts may arise in thy
mind.'"
