SECTION X
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed, O thou of Kuru's race, by the old
king, the citizens and the inhabitants of the provinces stood sometime
like men deprived of consciousness. King Dhritarashtra, finding them
silent, with their throats choked by grief, once more addressed them,
saying, 'Ye best of men, old as I am, sonless, and indulging, through
cheerlessness of heart, in diverse lamentations along with this my wedded
wife, I have obtained the permission, in the matter of my retirement into
the forest, of my sire, the Island-born Krishna himself, as also of king
Yudhishthira, who is conversant with every duty, ye righteous denizens of
this kingdom. Ye sinless ones, I, with Gandhari, repeatedly solicit you
with bent heads. It behoves you all to grant us permission.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these pitiable words of the Kuru king,
O monarch, the assembled denizens of Kurujangala all began to weep.
Covering their faces with their hands and upper garments, all those men
burning with grief, wept for a while as fathers and mothers would weep
(at the prospect of a dear son about to leave them for ever). Bearing in
their hearts, from which every other thought had been dispelled, the
sorrow born of Dhritarashtra's desire to leave the world, they looked
like men deprived of all consciousness. Checking that agitation of heart
due to the announcement of Dhritarashtra's desire of going to the forest,
they gradually were able to address one another, expressing their wishes.
Settling their words in brief, O king, they charged a certain Brahmana
with the task of replying unto the old monarch. That learned Brahmana, of
good behaviour, chosen by unanimous consent, conversant with all topics,
master of all the Richs, and named Samba, endeavoured to speak. Taking
the permission of the whole assembly and with its full approbation, that
learned Brahmana of great intelligence, conscious of his own abilities,
said these words unto the king,--'O monarch, the answer of this assembly
has been committed to my care. I shall voice it, O hero. Do thou receive
it, O king. What thou gayest, O king of kings, is all true, O puissant
one. There is nothing in it that is even slightly untrue. Thou art our
well-wisher, as, indeed, we are thine. Verily, in this race of kings,
there never wag a king who coming to rule his subjects became unpopular
with them. Ye have ruled us like fathers or brothers. King Duryodhana
never did us any wrong. Do that, O king, which that righteous-souled
ascetic, the son of Satyavati, has said. He is, verily, our foremost of
instructors. Left by thee, O monarch, we shall have to pass our days in
grief and sorrow, filled with remembrance of thy hundreds of virtues. We
were well protected and ruled by king Duryodhana even as we had been
ruled by king Santanu, or by Chitrangada, or by thy father, O monarch,
who was protected by the prowess of Bhishma, or by Pandu, that ruler of
Earth, who was overlooked by thee in all his acts. Thy son, O monarch,
never did us the slightest wrong. We lived, relying on that king as
trustfully as on our own father. It is known to thee how we lived (under
that ruler). After the same manner, we have enjoyed great happiness, O
monarch, for thousands of years, under the rule of Kunti's son of great
intelligence and wisdom[27]. This righteous-souled king who performs
sacrifices with gifts in profusion, follows the conduct of the royal
sages of old, belonging to thy race, of meritorious deeds, having Kuru
and Samvara and others and Bharata of great intelligence among them.
There is nothing, O monarch, that is even slightly censurable in the
matter of this Yudhishthira's rule. Protected and ruled by thee, we have
all lived in great happiness. The slightest demerit is incapable of being
alleged against thee and thy son. Regarding what thou hast said about
Duryodhana in the matter of this carnage of kinsmen, I beg thee, O
delighter of the Kurus (to listen to me).'
"The Brahmana continued, 'The destruction that has overtaken the Kurus
was not brought about by Duryodhana. It was not brought about by thee.
Nor was it brought about by Karna and Suvala's son. We know that it was
brought about by destiny, and that it was incapable of being
counteracted. Verily, destiny is not capable of being resisted by human
exertion. Eight and ten Akshauhinis of troops, O monarch, were brought
together. In eight and ten days that host was destroyed by the foremost
of Kuru warriors, viz., Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and others, and the
high-souled Karna, and the heroic Yuyudhana, and Dhrishtadyumna, and by
the four sons of Pandu, that is, Bhima and Arjuna and twins. This
(tremendous) carnage, O king, could not happen without the influence of
destiny. Without doubt, by Kshatriyas in particular, should foes be slain
and death encountered in battle. By those foremost of men, endued with
science and might of arms, the Earth has been exterminated with her
steeds and cars and elephants. Thy son was not the cause of that carnage
of high-souled kings. Thou wert not the cause, nor thy servants, nor
Karna, nor Suvala's son. The destruction of those foremost ones of Kuru's
race and of kings by thousands, know, was brought about by destiny. Who
can say anything else in this? Thou art regarded as the Guru and the
master of the whole world. We, therefore, in thy presence, absolve thy
righteous-souled son. Let that king, with all his associates, obtain the
regions reserved for heroes. Permitted by foremost of Brahmanas, let him
sport blissfully in heaven. Thou also shalt attain to great merit, and
unswerving steadiness in virtue. O thou of excellent vows, follow thou
fully the duties indicated in the Vedas. It is not necessary for either
thee or ourselves to look after the Pandavas. They are capable of ruling
the very Heavens, what need then be said of the Earth? O thou of great
intelligence, in prosperity as in adversity, the subjects of this
kingdom, O foremost one of Kuru's race, will be obedient to the Pandavas
who have conduct for their ornament. The son of Pandu makes those
valuable gifts which are always to be made to foremost of regenerate
persons in sacrifices and in obsequial rites, after the manner of all the
great kings of antiquity. The high-minded son of Kunti is mild, and
self-restrained, and is always disposed to spend as if he were a second
Vaisravana. He has great ministers that attend on him. He is
compassionate to even his foes. Indeed, that foremost one of Bharata's
race is of pure conduct. Endued with great intelligence, he is perfectly
straight-forward in his dealings and rules and protects us like a father
protecting his children. From association with him who is the son of
Dharma, O royal sage, Bhima and Arjuna and others will never do us the
least wrong. They are mild, O thou of Kuru's race, unto them that are
mild, and fierce like snakes of virulent poison unto them that are
fierce. Possessed of great energy, those high-souled ones are always
devoted to the good of the people. Neither Kunti, nor thy
(daughter-in-law) Panchali, nor Ulupi, nor the princess of the Sattwata
race, will do the least wrong to these people.[28] The affection which
thou hast shown towards us and which in Yudhishthira is seen to exist in
a still larger measure is incapable of being forgotten by the people of
the city and the provinces. Those mighty car-warriors, viz., the son of
Kunti, themselves devoted to the duties of the righteousness, will
protect and cherish the people even if these happen to be unrighteous. Do
thou, therefore, O king, dispelling all anxiety of heart on account of
Yudhishthira, set thyself to the accomplishment of all meritorious acts,
O foremost of men.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words, fraught with righteousness
and merit, of that Brahmana and approving of them, every person in that
assembly said, 'Excellent, Excellent' and accepted them as his own.
Dhritarashtra also, repeatedly applauding those words, slowly dismissed
that assembly of his subjects. Thus honoured by them and looked upon with
auspicious glances, the old king, O chief of Bharata's race, joined his
hands and honoured them all in return. He then entered his own mansion
with Gandhari. Listen now to what he did after that night had passed
away."'
