SECTION XXXIII
"The Brahmana said, 'I do not, O timid one, move in this world in that
manner which thou, according to thy own understanding, censurest. I am a
Brahmana possessed of Vedic knowledge, I am emancipated. I am a forest
recluse. I am an observer of the duties of a house-holder. I observe
vows. I am not what thou seest me in good and bad acts. By me is pervaded
everything that exists in this universe. Whatever creatures exist in the
world, mobile or immobile, know that I am the destroyer of them all, even
as fire is (the destroyer) of all kinds of wood. Of sovereignty over the
whole Earth or over Heaven (on the one hand), or this knowledge (of my
identity with the universe), this knowledge is my wealth.[93] This is the
one path for Brahmanas, by which they who understand it proceed to
house-holds, or abodes in the forest, or residence with preceptors, or
among mendicants.[94] With numerous unconfused symbols, only one
knowledge is worshipped. Those who, whatever the symbols and modes of
life to which they adhere, have acquired an understanding having
tranquillity for its essence, attain to that one entity even as numerous
rivers all meeting the Ocean.[95] The path is traversable with the aid of
the understanding and not of this body. Actions have both beginning and
end, and the body has actions for its bonds.[96] Hence, O blessed lady,
thou needst have no apprehension in respect of the world hereafter. With
thy heart intent upon the real entity, it is my soul into which thou wilt
come.'"
