SECTION LXXI
Vaisampayana, said, 'Hearing that the Pandavas were near, that crusher of
foes, viz., Vasudeva, accompanied by his ministers, went out for seeing
them.
The Pandavas then, uniting with the Vrishnis according to the usual
formalities, together entered, O king, the city named after the elephant.
With the hum of voices and the clatter of cars of that mighty host, the
Earth and the welkin, and the firmament itself, became as it were
entirely filled. The Pandavas, with rejoicing hearts, accompanied by
their officers and friends entered the capital, placing that treasure in
their van. Repairing, agreeably to custom, to king Dhritarashtra first,
they worshipped his feet, announcing their respective names. Those
foremost ones of Bharata's race, O chief of kings, then paid their
respectful salutations to Gandhari, the daughter of Suvala and to Kunti,
They next worshipped (their uncle) Vidura and met Yuyutsu, the son of
Dhritarashtra by his Vaisya wife. Those heroes were then worshipped by
others and they blazed forth in beauty, O king. After this, O Bharata,
those heroes heard the tidings of that highly wonderful and marvellous
and glad-some birth of thy father. Hearing of that feat of Vasudeva of
great intelligence, they all worshipped Krishna, the delighter of Devaki,
who was every way worthy of worship. Then, after a few days, Vyasa, the
son of Satyavati, endued with great energy, came to the city named after
the elephant. The perpetuators of Kuru's race worshipped the great Rishi
according to the usual custom. Indeed, those heroes, with those foremost
princes of the Vrishni and the Andhaka races, paid the sage their
adorations. After having conversed on various subjects, Dharma's son
Yudhishthira addressed Vyasa and said, 'This treasure, O holy one, which
has been brought through thy grace I wish to devote to that great
sacrifice known by the name of the horse-sacrifice. O best of ascetics, I
desire to have thy permission. We are all, O Rishi, at thy disposal, and
at that of the high-souled Krishna.'
"Vyasa said, 'I give thee permission, O king. Do what should be done
after this. Do thou worship the deities duly by performing the
horse-sacrifice with profuse gifts. The horse-sacrifice, O king, is a
cleanser of all sins. Without doubt, having worshipped the deities by
that sacrifice thou wilt surely be cleansed of all sins.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, the Kuru king Yudhisthira of
righteous soul then set his heart, O monarch, on making the necessary
preparations for the horse-sacrifice. Having represented all this unto
the Island-born Krishna, the king endued with great eloquence approached
Vasudeva and said,--'O foremost of all beings, the goddess Devaki has,
through thee, come to be regarded as the most fortunate of mothers! O
thou of unfading glory, do thou accomplish that which I shall now tell
thee, O mighty-armed one. O delighter of the Kurus, the diverse
enjoyments we enjoy have all been acquired through thy puissance. The
whole Earth has been subjugated by thee with the aid of thy prowess and
intelligence. Do thou, therefore, cause thyself to undergo the rites of
initiation. Thou art our highest preceptor and master. If thou performest
the sacrifice, O thou of the Dasarha race, I shall be cleansed from every
sin. Thou art Sacrifice. Thou art the Indestructible. Thou art this All.
Thou art Righteousness. Thou art Prajapati. Thou art the goal of all
creatures. Even this is my certain conclusion.'
"Vasudeva said, 'O mighty-armed one, it becomes thee to say so, O
chastiser of foes. Thou art the goal of all creatures. Even this is my
certain conclusion. Amongst the heroes of the Kuru race, in consequence
of thy righteousness, thou shinest today in great glory. They have all
been cast into the shade, O king, by thee. Thou art our king, and thou
art our senior. With my approval freely granted, do thou adore the
deities in the sacrifice suggested. Do thou, O Bharata, appoint us to
whatever tasks thou likest. Truly, do I pledge myself that I shall
accomplish all, O sinless one, that thou mayst bid me accomplish.
Bhimasena and Arjuna and the two sons of Madravati will be sacrificing
when thou, O king, sacrificest.'"[188]
