SECTION XXV
"Vaisampayana said, 'The king, O chief of Bharata's race, with those
foremost of men, viz., his brothers, who were all possessed of eyes that
resembled lotus-petals, took his seat in the retreat of his eldest sire.
There sat around him many highly-blessed ascetics, hailing from diverse
regions, from desire of beholding the sons of that lord of Kuru's race.,
viz., the Pandavas of wide chests. They said, 'We wish to know who
amongst these is Yudhishthira, who are Bhima and Arjuna, who the twins,
and who is Draupadi of great fame.' Then the Suta, Sanjaya, in answer to
their queries, pointed out to them the Pandavas. naming each, and
Draupadi too as also the other ladies of the Kuru household.'
"Sanjaya said, 'This one that is as fair of complexion as pure gold, that
is endued with a body which looks like that of a full-grown lion, that is
possessed of a large aquiline nose, and wide and expansive eyes that are,
again, of a coppery hue, is the Kuru king. This one, whose tread
resembles that of an infuriate elephant, whose complexion is as fair as
that of heated gold, whose frame is of large and expansive proportions
and whose arms are long and stout, is Vrikodara. Behold him well! The
mighty bowman who sits besides him, of darkish complexion and youthful
frame, who resembles the leader of an elephantine herd, whose shoulders
are as high as those of a lion, who walks like a sporting elephant, and
whose eyes are as expansive as the petals of a lotus, is the hero called
Arjuna. Those two foremost of men, that are sitting besides Kunti, are
the twins, resembling Vishnu and Mahendra. In this whole world of men,
they have not their equals in beauty and strength and excellence of
conduct. This lady, of eyes as expansive as lotus petals, who seems to
have touched the middle age of life, whose complexion resembles that of
the blue lotus, and who looks like a goddess of Heaven, is Krishna, the
embodied form of the goddess of prosperity.[39] She who sits besides her,
possessed of the complexion of pure gold, who looks like the embodied
rays of the moon, in the midst of the other ladies, is, ye foremost of
regenerate ones, the sister of that unrivalled hero who wields the
discus. This other, as fair as pure gold, is the daughter of the
snake-chief and wife of Arjuna.[40] This other whose complexion is like
that of pure gold or like that of Madhuka flowers, is the princess
Chitrangada. This one, that is possessed of the complexion of an
assemblage of blue lotuses, is the sister of that monarch, that lord of
hosts, who used to always challenge Krishna. She is the foremost wife of
Vrikodara. This is the daughter of the king of Magadha who was known by
the name of Jarasandha. Possessed of the complexion of an assemblage of
Champakas, she is the wife of the youngest son of Madravati. Possessed of
a complexion as darkish as that of the blue lotus, she who sits there on
the earth, and whose eyes are as expansive as lotus-petals, is the wife
of the eldest son of Madravati, This lady whose complexion is as fair as
that of heated gold and who sits with her child on her lap, is the
daughter of king Virata. She is the wife of that Abhimanyu who, while
divested of his car, was slain by Drona and others fighting from their
cars.[41] These ladies, the hair on whose heads shows not the parted
line, and who are clad in white, are the widows of the slain sons of
Dhritarashtra. They are the daughters-in-law of this old king, the wives
of his hundred sons, now deprived of both their husbands and children who
have been slain by heroic foes. I have now pointed them out in the order
of precedence. In consequence of their devotion to Brahmanas, their
understandings and hearts are divested of every kind of crookedness.
Possessed of pure souls, they have all been pointed out by me,--these
princesses of the Kaurava house-hold,--in answer to your queries.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus that king of Kuru's race, of very advanced
years, having met with those sons of him that was a deity among men.
enquired about their welfare after all the ascetics had gone away. The
warriors who had accompanied the Pandavas, leaving the retreat, sat
themselves down at a little distance, alighting from their cars and the
animals they rode. Indeed, after all the crowd, viz., the ladies, the old
men, and the children, had been seated, the old king duly addressed them,
making the usual enquiries of politeness."'
