SECTION IV
"Vyasa said, 'O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, do without any scruple what
Dhritarashtra of Kuru's race hag said. This king is old. He has, again,
been made sonless. I think he will not be able to bear his grief long.
The highly blessed Gandhari, possessed of great wisdom and endued with
kindly speech, bears with fortitude her excessive grief owing to the logs
of her song. I also tell thee (what the old king says). Do thou obey my
words. Let the old king have thy permission. Let him not die an
inglorious death at home. Let this king follow the path of all royal
sages of old. Verily, for all royal sages, retirement into the woods
comes at last.'"
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed at that time by Vyasa of wonderful
deeds, king Yudhishthira the just, possessed of mighty energy, said unto
the great ascetic these words, 'Thy holy self is held by us in great
reverence. Thou alone art our preceptor. Thou alone art the refuge of
this our kingdom as also of our race. I am thy son. Thou, O holy one, art
my father. Thou art our king, and thou art our preceptor. The son should,
agreeably to every duty, be obedient to the commands of his sire.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by the king. Vyasa, that
foremost of poets, foremost of all persons conversant with the Vedas,
endued with great energy once more said unto Yudhishthira these words,
'It is even so, O mighty-armed one. It is even as thou sayest, O Bharata.
This king has reached old age. He is now in the last stage of life.
Permitted both by me and thee, let this lord of Earth do what he
proposes. Do not stand as an impediment in his way. Even this is the
highest duty, O Yudhishthira, of royal sages. They should die either in
battle or in the woods agreeably to the scriptures. Thy royal sire,
Pandu, O king of kings, reverenced this old king as a disciple reverences
his preceptor. (At that time) he adored the gods in many great sacrifices
with profuse gifts consisting of hills of wealth and jewels, and ruled
the Earth and protected his subjects wisely and well. Having obtained a
large progeny and a swelling kingdom, he enjoyed great influence for
thirteen years while you were in exile, and gave away much wealth.
Thyself also, O chief of men, with thy servants, O sinless one, hast
adored this king and the famous Gandhari with that ready obedience which.
a disciple pays to his preceptor. Do thou grant permission to thy father.
The time has come for him to attend to the practice of penances. He does
not harbour, O Yudhishthira, even the slightest anger against any of you.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said these words, Vyasa soothed the old
king. Yudhishthira then answered him, saying, 'So be it.' The great
ascetic then left the palace for proceeding to the woods. After the holy
Vyasa had gone away, the royal son of Pandu softly said these words unto
his old father, bending himself in humility,--What the holy Vyasa has
said, what is thy own purpose, what the great bowman Kripa has said, what
Vidura has expressed, and what has been asked for by Yuyutsu and Sanjaya,
I shall accomplish with speed. All these are worthy of my respect, for
all of them are well-wishers of our race. This, however, O king, I beg of
thee by bending my head. Do thou first eat and afterwards go to thy
forest retreat.'"
