SECTION II
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus worshipped by the Pandavas, the royal soil of
Amvika passed his time happily as before, waited upon and honoured by the
Rishis. That perpetuator of Kuru's race used to make those foremost of
offerings which should be given to the Brahmanas. The royal son of Kunti
always placed those articles under Dhritarashtra's control. Destitute of
malice as king Yudhishthira was, he was always affectionate towards his
uncle. Addressing his brothers and councillors, the king said, 'King
Dhritarashtra should be honoured both by myself and you all. He. indeed,
is a well-wisher of mine who is obedient to the commands of
Dhritarashtra. He, on the other hand, who behaves otherwise towards him,
is my enemy. Such a man should certainly be punished by me. On days of
performing the rites ordained for the Pitris, as also in the Sraddhas
performed for his sons and all well-wishers, the high-souled Kuru king
Dhritarashtra, gave away unto Brahmanas, as each deserved, as profuse
measures of wealth as he liked. King Yudhishthira the just, and Bhima,
and Arjuna, and the twins, desirous of doing what was agreeable to the
old king, used to execute all his orders. They always took care that the
old king who was afflicted with the slaughter of his sons and
grandsons,--with, that is, grief caused by the Pandavas
themselves,--might not die of his grief Indeed, the Pandavas bore
themselves towards him in such a way that that Kuru hero might not be
deprived of that happiness and all those articles of enjoyment which had
been his while his sons lived. The five brothers, viz., the sons of
Pandu, behaved themselves even thus towards Dhritarashtra, living under
his command. Dhritarashtra also, seeing them so humble and obedient to
his commands and acting towards him as disciples towards preceptors,
adopted the affectionate behaviour of a preceptor towards them in return.
Gandhari, by performing the diverse rites of the Sraddha and making gifts
unto Brahmanas of diverse objects of enjoyment, became freed from the
debt she owed to her slain children. Thus did that foremost of righteous
men, viz., king Yudhishthira the just, possessed of great intelligence,
along with his brothers, worship king Dhritarashtra.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Possessed of great energy, that perpetuator of
Kuru's race, viz., the old king Dhritarashtra, could not notice any
ill-will in Yudhishthira Seeing that the high-souled Pandavas were in the
observance of a wise and righteous conduct, king Dhritarashtra, the son
of Amvika, became gratified with them. Suvala's daughter, Gandhari,
casting off all sorrow for her (slain) children, began to show great
affection for the Pandavas as if they were her own children. Endued with
great energy, the Kuru king Yudhishthira, never did anything that was
disagreeable to the royal son of Vichitraviryya. On the other hand, he
always behaved towards him in a highly agreeable way. Whatever acts,
grave or light, were directed by king Dhritarashtra, or the helpless
Gandhari to be done, were all accomplished with reverence, O monarch, by
that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the Pandava king. The old king
became highly gratified with such conduct of Yudhishthira. Indeed, he was
grieved at the remembrance of his own wicked son. Rising every day at
early dawn, he purified himself and went through his recitations, and
then blessed the Pandavas by wishing them victory in battle. Making the
usual gifts unto the Brahmanas and causing them to utter benedictions,
and Pouring libations on the sacred fire, the old king prayed for long
life to the Pandavas. Indeed, the king had never derived that great
happiness from his own sons which he always derived from the sons of
Pandu. King Yudhishthira at that time became as agreeable to the
Brahmanas as to the Kshatriyas, and the diverse bands of Vaisyas and
Sudras of his realm. Whatever wrongs were done to him by the sons of
Dhritarashtra, king Yudhishthira, forgot them all, and reverenced his
uncle. If any man did anything that was not agreeable to the son of
Amvika, he became thereby an object of hatred to the intelligent son of
Kunti. Indeed, through fear of Yudhishthira, nobody could talk of the
evil deeds of either Duryodhana or Dhritarashtra. Both Gandhari and
Vidura also wore well pleased with the capacity the king Ajatasatru
showed for bearing wrongs. They were, however, not so pleased, O slayer
of foes, with Bhima. Dharma's son, Yudhishthira, was truly obedient to
his uncle. Bhima, however, at the sight of Dhritarashtra, became very
cheerless. That slayer of foes, seeing Dharma's son reverencing the old
king, reverenced him outwardly with a very unwilling heart."'
