SECTION LIX
"Janamejaya said, 'After having conferred that boon on Utanka, O foremost
of regenerate persons, what did the mighty-armed Govinda of great
celebrity next do?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having granted that boon to Utanka, Govinda,
accompanied by Satyaki, proceeded to Dwaraka on his car drawn by his
large steeds endued with great speed. Passing many lakes and rivers and
forests and hills, he at last came upon the delightful city of Dwaravati.
It was at the time, O king, when the festival of Raivataka had begun,
that he of eyes like lotus-petals arrived with Satyaki as his companion.
Adorned with many beautiful things and covered with diverse Koshas made
of jewels and gems, the Raivataka hill shone, O king, with great
splendour. That high mountain, decked with excellent garlands of gold and
gay festoons of flowers, with many large trees that looked like the Kalpa
trees of Indra's garden, and with many golden poles on which were lighted
lamps, shone in beauty through day and night. By the caves and fountains
the light was so great that it seemed to be broad day. On all sides
beautiful flags waved on the air with little bells that jingled
continuously. The entire hill resounded with the melodious songs of men
and women. Raivataka presented a most charming prospect like Meru with
all his jewels and gems. Men and women, excited and filled with delight,
O Bharata, sang aloud. The swell of music that thus rose from that
foremost of mountains seemed to touch the very heavens. Everywhere were
heard spouts and loud whoops of men who were in all stages of excitement.
The cackle of thousands of voices made that mountain delightful and
charming. It was adorned with many shops and stalls filled with diverse
viands and enjoyable articles. There were heaps of cloths and garlands,
and the music of Vinas and flutes and Mridangas was heard everywhere.
Food mixed with wines of diverse kinds was stored here and there. Gifts
were being ceaselessly made to those that were distressed, or blind, or
helpless. In consequence of all this, the festival of that mountain
became highly auspicious. There were many sacred abodes built on the
breast of that mountain, O hero, within which resided many men of
righteous deeds. Even thus did the heroes of Vrishni's race sport in that
festival of Raivataka. Equipt with those mansions, that mountain shone
like a second Heaven. At the arrival of Krishna, O chief of Bharata's
race, that prince of mountains resembled the blessed abode of Indra
himself. Worshipped (by his relatives), Krishna then entered a beautiful
mansion. Satyaki also went to his own quarters with a delighted soul.
Govinda entered his residence after a long absence, having accomplished
feats of great difficulty like Vasava amid the Danava host. The heroes of
the Bhoja, Vrishni, and Andhaka races, all came forward to receive that
high-souled one like the deities advancing to receive him of a hundred
sacrifices. Endued with great intelligence, he honoured them in return
and enquired after their welfare. With a gratified heart he then saluted
his father and mother. The mighty-armed hero was embraced by both of them
and comforted too (by numerous evidences of affection). He then took his
seat with all the Vrishnis sitting around him. Having washed his feet and
dispelled his fatigue, Krishna of mighty energy, as he sat there, then
recounted the chief incidents of the great battle in answer to the
questions put to him by his sire.'"
