SECTION XC
"Janamejaya said, 'It behoveth thee to tell me of any wonderful incident
that occurred in the sacrifice of my grandsires.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hear, O chief of kings of a most wonderful incident
that occurred, O puissant monarch, at the conclusion of that great
horse-sacrifice. After all the foremost of Brahmanas and all the kinsmen
and relatives and friends, and all the poor, the blind, and the helpless
ones had been gratified, O chief of Bharata's race, when the gifts made
in profusion were being spoken of on all sides, indeed, when flowers were
rained down on the head of king Yudhishthira the just, a blue-eyed
mongoose, O sinless one, with one side of his body changed into gold,
came there and spoke in a voice that was as loud and deep as thunder.
Repeatedly uttering such deep sounds and thereby frightening all animals
and birds, that proud denizen of a hole, with large body, spoke in a
human voice and said, 'Ye kings, this great sacrifice is not equal to a
prastha of powdered barley given away by a liberal Brahmana of
Kurukshetra who was observing the Unccha vow.' Hearing these words of the
mongoose, O king, all those foremost of Brahmanas became filled with
wonder. Approaching the mongoose, they then asked him, saying, 'Whence
hast thou come to this sacrifice, this resort of the good and the pious?
What is the extent of thy might? What thy learning? And what thy refuge?
How should we know thee that thus censurest this our sacrifice? Without
having disregarded any portion of the scriptures, everything that should
be done has been accomplished here according to the scriptures and
agreeably to reason, with the aid of diverse sacrificial rites. Those who
are deserving of worship have been duly worshipped here according to the
way pointed out by the scriptures. Libations have been poured on the
sacred fire with the aid of proper mantras. That which should be given
has been given away without pride. The regenerate class have been
gratified with gifts of diverse kinds. The Kshatriyas have been gratified
with battles fought according to just methods. The grandsires have been
gratified with Sraddhas. The Vaisyas have been gratified by the
protection offered to them, and many foremost of women have been
gratified by accomplishing their desires. The Sudras have been gratified
by kind speeches, and others with the remnants of the profuse wealth
collected on the spot. Kinsmen and relatives have been gratified by the
purity of behaviour displayed by our king. The deities have been
gratified by libations of clarified butter and acts of merit, and
dependants and followers by protection. That therefore, which is true, do
thou truly declare unto these Brahmanas. Indeed, do thou declare what is
agreeable to the scriptures and to actual experience, asked by the
Brahmanas who are eager to know. Thy words seem to demand credit. Thou
art wise. Thou bearest also a celestial form. Thou hast come into the
midst of learned Brahmanas. It behoveth thee to explain thyself.' Thus
addressed by those regenerate persons, the mongoose, smiling, answered
them as follows. 'Ye regenerate ones, the words I have uttered are not
false. Neither have I spoken them from pride. That which I have said may
have been heard by you all. Ye foremost of regenerate persons, this
sacrifice is not equal in merit to the gift of a prastha of powdered
barley. Without doubt, I should say this, ye foremost of Brahmanas.
Listen to me with undivided attention as I narrate what happened to thee
truly. Wonderful and excellent was the occurrence that fell out. It was
witnessed by me and its consequences were felt by me. The incident
relates to a liberal Brahmana dwelling in Kurukshetra in the observance
of the Unccha vow. In consequence of that incident he attained to Heaven,
ye regenerate ones, along with his wife and son and daughter-in-law. And
in consequence of what then happened half my body became transformed into
gold.'
"The Mongoose continued, 'Ye regenerate ones, I shall presently tell you
what the excellent fruit was of the gift, made by a Brahmana, of a very
little measure (of powdered barley) obtained by lawful means. On that
righteous spot of ground known by the name of Kurukshetra, which is the
abode of many righteous persons, there lived a Brahmana in the observance
of what is called the Unccha vow. That mode of living is like unto that
of the pigeon.[214] He lived there with his wife and son and
daughter-in-law and practised penances. Of righteous soul, and with
senses under complete control, he adopted the mode of living that is
followed by a parrot. Of excellent vows, he used to eat everyday at the
sixth division.[215] If there was nothing to eat at the sixth division of
the day, that excellent Brahmana would fast for that day and eat the next
day at the sixth division. On one occasion, ye Brahmanas, there occurred
a dreadful famine in the land. During that time there was nothing stored
in the abode of that righteous Brahmana. The herbs and plants were all
dried up and the whole realm became void of foodstore. When the
accustomed hours came for eating, the Brahmana had nothing to eat. This
occurred day after day. All the members of his family were afflicted with
hunger but were obliged to pass the days as best they could. One day, in
the month of Jaishtha, while the Sun was in the meridian, the Brahmana
was engaged in picking up grains of corn. Afflicted by heat and hunger,
he was practising even this penance. Unable to obtain grains of corn, the
Brahmana soon became worn out with hunger and toil. Indeed, with all the
members of his family, he had no food to eat. That best of Brahmanas
passed the days in great suffering. One day, after the sixth division
came, he succeeded in obtaining a prastha of barley. That barley was then
reduced by those ascetics to powder for making what is called Saktu of
it. Having finished their silent recitations and other daily rites, and
having duly poured libations on the sacred fire, those ascetics divided
that little measure of powdered barley amongst themselves so that the
share of each came up to the measure of a Kudava.[216] As they were about
to sit down for eating, there came unto their abode a guest. Beholding
the person who came as a guest, all of them became exceedingly glad.
Indeed, seeing him, they saluted him and made the usual enquiries of
welfare. They were of pure minds, self-restrained, and endued with faith
and control over the passions. Freed from malice, they had conquered
wrath. Possessed of piety, they were never pained at the sight of other
people's happiness. They had cast off pride and haughtiness and anger.
Indeed, they were conversant with every duty, ye foremost of regenerate
ones. Informing their guest of their own penances and of the race or
family to which they belonged, and ascertaining from him in return those
particulars, they caused that hungry guest of theirs to enter their
cottage. Addressing him they said, 'This is the Arghya for thee. This
water is for washing thy feet. There are scattered some Kusa grass for
thy seat, O sinless one. Here is some clean Saktu acquired by lawful
means, O puissant one. Given by us, O foremost of regenerate persons, do
thou accept it,' Thus addressed by them, that Brahmana accepted the
Kudava of powdered barley that was offered to him and ate it all. But his
hunger, O king, was not appeased by what he ate. The Brahmana in the
observance of the Unccha vow, seeing that his guest's hunger was still
unappeased, began to think of what other food he could place before him
for gratifying him. Then his wife said unto him,--'Let my share be given
unto him. Let this foremost of regenerate persons be gratified and let
him then go whithersoever he will.' Knowing that his chaste wife who said
so was herself afflicted by hunger, that best of Brahmanas could not
approve of her share of the powdered barley being given to the guest.
Indeed, that best of Brahmanas possessed of learning, knowing from his
own state that his aged, toil-worn, cheerless, and helpless wife was
herself afflicted by hunger and seeing that lady who had been emaciated
into mere skin and bone was quivering with weakness, addressed her and
said, 'O beautiful one, with even animals, with even worms and insects,
wives are fed and protected. It behoveth thee not, therefore, to say so.
The wife treats her lord with kindness and feeds and protects him.
Everything appertaining to religion, pleasure, and wealth, careful
nursing, offspring for perpetuating the race, are all dependent on the
wife. Indeed, the merits of a person himself as also of his deceased
ancestors depend also on her. The wife should know her lord by his acts.
Verily, that man who fails to protect his wife earns great infamy here
and goes into Hell hereafter. Such a man falls down from even a position
of great fame and never succeeds in acquiring regions of happiness
hereafter.' Thus addressed, she answered him, saying, 'O regenerate one,
our religious acts and wealth are united. Do thou take a fourth of this
barley. Indeed, be gratified with me. Truth, pleasure, religious merit,
and Heaven as acquirable, by good qualities, of women, as also all the
objects of their desire, O foremost of regenerate ones, are dependent on
the husband. In the production of offspring the mother contributes her
blood. The father contributes his seed. The husband is the highest deity
of the wife. Through the grace of the husband, women obtain both pleasure
and offspring as the reward. Thou art my Pati (lord) for the protection
thou givest me. Thou art my Bhartri for the means of sustenance thou
givest me. Thou art, again, boon-giver to me in consequence of thy having
presented me a son. Do thou, therefore, (in return for so many favours),
take my share of the barley and give it unto the guest. Overcome by
decrepitude, thou art of advanced years. Afflicted by hunger thou art
exceedingly weakened. Worn out with fasts, thou art very much emaciated.
(If thou couldst part with thy share, why should not I part with mine)'
Thus addressed by her, he took her share of the powdered barley and
addressing his guest said,--'O regenerate one, O best of men, do thou
accept this measure of powdered barley as well.' The Brahmana, having
accepted that quantity, immediately ate it up, but his hunger was not yet
appeased. Beholding him ungratified, the Brahmana in the observance of
the Unccha vow became thoughtful. His son then said unto him, 'O best of
men, taking my share of the barely do thou give it to the guest. I regard
this act of mine as one of great merit. Therefore, do it. Thou shouldst
be always maintained by me with great care. Maintenance of the father is
a duty which the good always covet. The maintenance of the father in his
old age is the duty ordained for the son. Even this is the eternal sruti
(audition) current in the three worlds, O learned Rishi. By barely living
thou art capable of practising penances. The life-breath is the great
deity that resides in the bodies of all embodied creatures.'[217]
"The father, at this, said, 'If thou attainest to the age of even a
thousand years, thou wilt still seem to me to be only a little child.
Having begotten a son, the sire achieves success through him. O puissant
one, I know that the hunger of children is very strong. I am old. I shall
somehow succeed in holding my life-breaths. Do thou, O son, become strong
(by eating the food that has fallen to thy share). Old and decrepit as I
am, O son, hunger scarcely afflicts me. I have, again, for many years,
practised penances. I have no fear of death.'
"The son said, 'I am thy offspring. The Sruti declares that one's
offspring is called putra because one is rescued by him. One's own self,
again, takes birth as one's son. Do thou, therefore, rescue thyself by
thy own self (in the form of thy son).'
"The father said, 'In form thou art like me. In conduct and in
self-restraint also thou art my like. Thou hast been examined on various
occasions by me. I shall, therefore, accept thy share of the barley, O
son.' Having said this, that foremost of regenerate persons cheerfully
took his son's share of the barley and smilingly presented it to his
regenerate guest. Having eaten that barley also, the guest's hunger was
not appeased. The righteous-souled host in the observance of the unccha
vow became ashamed (at the thought that he had nothing more to give).
Desirous of doing what was agreeable to him, his chaste daughter-in-law
then, bearing her share of the barley, approached him and said, 'Through
thy son, O learned Brahmana, I shall obtain a son. Do thou, therefore,
take my share of the barley and give it unto this guest. Through thy
grace, numerous regions of beatitude will be mine for eternity. Through
the grandson one obtains those regions repairing whither one has not to
endure any kind of misery. Like the triple aggregate beginning with
Religion, or the triple aggregate of sacred fires, there is a triple
aggregate of everlasting Heavens, depending upon the son, the grandson,
and the great-grandson. The son is called Putra because he frees his
sires from debt. Through sons and grandsons one always enjoys the
happiness of those regions which are reserved for the pious and the good.'
"The father-in-law said, 'O thou of excellent vows and conduct, beholding
thee wasted by wind and sun, deprived of thy very complexion, emaciated
and almost destitute of consciousness through hunger, how can I be such a
transgressor against the rules of righteousness as to take thy share of
the barley? O auspicious damsel, it behoves thee not to say so, for the
sake of those auspicious results for which every family must strive.[218]
O auspicious damsel, how can I behold thee: at even this, the sixth
division of the day, abstaining from food and observing vows? Thou art
endued with purity and good conduct and penances. Alas, even thou hast to
pass thy days in so much misery. Thou art a child, afflicted by hunger,
and belongest to the softer sex. Thou shouldst be always protected by me.
Alas, I have to see thee worn out with fasts, O thou that art the
delighter of all thy kinsmen.'
"The daughter-in-law said, 'Thou art the senior of my senior since thou
art the deity of my deity. Thou art verily the god of my god. Do thou,
therefore, O puissant one, take my share of the barley. My body,
life-breaths, and religious rites have all one purpose viz., the service
of my senior. Through thy grace, O learned Brahmana, I shall obtain many
regions of happiness hereafter. I deserve to be looked after by thee.
Know, O regenerate one, that I am wholly devoted to thee. Cherishing also
this thought, viz., that my happiness is thy concern, it behoveth thee to
take this my share of the barley.'
"The father-in-law said, 'O chaste lady, in consequence of such conduct
of thine thou wilt for ever shine in glory, for endued with vows and
steadiness in religious rites, thy eyes are directed to that conduct
which should be observed towards seniors. Therefore, O daughter-in-law, I
shall take thy share of the barley. Thou deservest not to be deceived by
me, reckoning all thy virtues. Thou art truly, O blessed damsel, the
foremost of all persons observing the duties of righteousness.' Having
said so unto her, the Brahmana took her share of the barley and gave it
unto his guest. At this the guest became gratified with the high-souled
Brahmana endued with great piety. With gratified soul, that first of
regenerate person, possessed of great eloquence, who was none else than
the deity of Righteousness in a human form, then addressed that foremost
of Brahmanas and said, 'O best of regenerate ones, I am exceedingly
gratified with this pure gift of thine, this gift of what was acquired by
lawful means by thee, and which thou didst freely part with, agreeably to
the rules of righteousness. Verily, this gift of thine is being bruited
about in Heaven by the denizens of that happy region. Behold, flowers
have been rained down from the firmament on the Earth. The celestial
Rishis, the deities, the Gandharvas, those who walk before the deities,
and the celestial messengers, are all praising thee, struck with wonder
at thy gift. The regenerate Rishis who dwell in the regions of Brahma,
seated on their cars, are solicitous of obtaining thy sight. O foremost
of regenerate persons, go to Heaven. The Pitris residing in their own
region have all been rescued by thee. Others also who have not attained
to the position of Pitris have equally been rescued by thee for countless
Yugas. For thy Brahmacharyya, thy gifts, thy sacrifices, thy penances,
and thy acts of piety done with a pure heart, go thou to Heaven. O thou
of excellent vows, thou practisest penances with great devotion. Thy
gifts have, therefore, gratified the deities highly, O best of regenerate
ones. Since thou hast made this gift, in a season of great difficulty,
with a pure heart, thou hast, by this act of thine, conquered Heaven.
Hunger destroys one's wisdom and drives off one's righteous
understanding. One whose intelligence is overwhelmed by hunger casts off
all fortitude. He, therefore, that conquers hunger conquers Heaven
without doubt. One's righteousness is never destroyed as long as one
cherishes the inclination of making gifts. Disregarding filial affection,
disregarding the affection one feels for one's wife, and reckoning
righteousness as the foremost, thou hast paid no heed to the cravings of
nature. The acquisition of wealth is an act of slight merit. Its gift to
a deserving person is fraught with greater merit. Of still greater merit
is the (proper) time. Lastly, devotion (in the matter of gift) is fraught
with the highest merit. The door of Heaven is very difficult to see.
Through heedlessness men fail to obtain a sight of it. The bar of
Heaven's door has cupidity for its seed. That bar is kept fastened by
desire and affection. Verily, Heaven's door is unapproachable. Those men
who subdued wrath and conquered their passions, those Brahmanas who are
endued with penances and who make gifts according to the measure of their
ability, succeed in beholding it. It has been said that he that gives
away a hundred, having a thousand, he that gives away ten, having a
hundred, and he that gives a handful of water, having no wealth, are all
equal in respect of the merit they earn. King Rantideva, when divested of
all his wealth, gave a small quantity of water with a pure heart. Through
this gift, O learned Brahmana, he went to Heaven. The deity of
righteousness is never gratified so much with large gifts of costly
things as with gifts of even things of no value, if acquired lawfully and
given away with devotion and faith. King Nriga had made gifts of
thousands of kine unto the regenerate class. By giving away only one cow
that did not belong to him, he fell into Hell. Usinara's son Sivi of
excellent vows, by giving away the flesh of his own body, is rejoicing in
Heaven, having attained to the regions of the righteous. Mere wealth is
not merit. Good men acquire merit by exerting to the best of their power
and with the aid of pious meals. One does not acquire such merit by means
of even diverse sacrifices as with even a little wealth that has been
earned lawfully. Through wrath, the fruits of gifts are destroyed.
Through cupidity one fails to go to Heaven. One conversant with the
merits of gift, and leading a just course of conduct succeeds, through
penances, in enjoying Heaven. The fruit, O Brahmana, of this gift made by
thee (of a prastha of powdered barley) is much greater than what one
acquires by many Rajasuya sacrifices with profuse gifts or many
Horse-sacrifices. With this prastha of powdered barley thou hast
conquered the eternal region of Brahman. Go thou in happiness, O learned
Brahmana, to the abode of Brahman that is without the stain of darkness.
O foremost of regenerate persons, a celestial car is here for all of you.
Do thou ascend it as pleasest thee, O Brahmana, I am the deity of
Righteousness. Behold me! Thou hast rescued thy body. The fame of thy
achievement will last in the world. With thy wife, thy son, and thy
daughter-in-law, go now to Heaven.'--After the deity of Righteousness had
said these words, that Brahmana, with his wife, son and daughter-in-law,
proceeded to Heaven. After that learned Brahmana, conversant with all
duties, had thus ascended to Heaven with his son, daughter-in-law, and
wife numbering the fourth, I came out of my hole. There with the scent of
that powdered barley, with the mire caused by the water (which the
Brahmana had given to his guest), with the contact (of my body) with the
celestial flowers that had been rained down, with the particles of the
barley-powder which that good man had given away, and the penances of
that Brahmana, my head became gold, Behold, in consequence of the gift of
that Brahmana who was firm in truth, and his penances, half of this my
ample body has become golden. Ye regenerate ones, for converting the rest
of my body into gold I repeatedly repair, with a cheerful heart, to the
retreats of ascetics and the sacrifices performed by kings. Hearing of
this sacrifice of the Kuru king endued with great wisdom, I came hither
with high hopes. I have not, however, been made gold. Ye foremost of
Brahmanas, it was for this that I uttered those words, viz., that this
sacrifice can by no means compare with (the gift of) that prastha of
powdered barley. With the grains of that prastha of powdered barley, I
was made gold on that occasion. This great sacrifice however, is not
equal to those grains. Even this is my opinion.' Having said those words
unto all those foremost of Brahmanas, the mongoose disappeared from their
sight. Those Brahmanas then returned to their respective homes.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'O conquerer of hostile towns, I have now told
thee all relating to that wonderful incident which occurred in that great
Horse-sacrifice. Thou shouldst not, O king, think highly of sacrifice.
Millions of Rishis have ascended to Heaven with the aid of only their
penances. Abstention from injury as regards all creatures, contentment,
conduct, sincerity, penances, self-restraint, truthfulness, and gifts are
each equal in point of merit to sacrifice."'
