SECTION III
"Vaisampayana said, 'The people who lived in the Kuru kingdom failed to
notice any variance in the cordiality that subsisted between king
Yudhishthira and the father of Duryodhana. When the Kuru king recollected
his wicked son, he then could not but feel unfriendly, in his heart,
towards Bhima. Bhimasena also, O king, impelled by a heart that seemed to
be wicked, was unable to put up with king Dhritarashtra. Vrikodara
secretly did many acts that were disagreeable to the old king. Through
deceitful servitors he caused the commands of his uncle to be disobeyed.
Recollecting the evil counsels of the old king and some acts of his,
Bhima, one day, in the midst of his friends, slapped his armpits, in the
hearing of Dhritarashtra and of Gandhari. The wrathful Vrikodara,
recollecting his foes Duryodhana and Karna and Dussasana, gave way to a
transport of passion, and said these harsh words: 'The sons of the blind
king, capable of fighting with diverse kinds of weapons, have all been
despatched by me to the other world with these arms of mine that resemble
a pair of iron clubs. Verily, these are those two arms of mine, looking
like maces of iron, and invincible by foes, coming within whose clasp the
sons of Dhritarashtra have all met with destruction. These are those two
well-developed and round arms of mine, resembling a pair of elephantine
trunks. Coming within their clasp, the foolish sons of Dhritarashtra have
all met with destruction. Smeared with sandal-paste and deserving of that
adornment are those two arms of mine by which Duryodhana has been
despatched to the other world along with all his sons and kinsmen.'
Hearing these and many other words, O king, of Vrikodara, that were
veritable darts, king Dhritarashtra gave way to cheerlessness and sorrow.
Queen Gandhari, however, who was conversant with every duty and possessed
of great intelligence, and who knew what Time brings on its course,
regarded them as untrue. After five and ten years had passed away, O
monarch, king Dhritarashtra afflicted (constantly) by the wordy darts of
Bhima, became penetrated with despair and grief. King Yudhishthira the
son of Kunti, however, knew it not; nor Arjuna of white steeds, nor
Kunti; nor Draupadi possessed of great fame; nor the twin sons of Madri,
conversant with every duty and who were always engaged in acting after
the wishes of Dhritarashtra. Employed in doing the behests of the king,
the twins never said anything that was disagreeable to the old king. Then
Dhritarashtra one day honoured his friends by his confidence. Addressing
'them with tearful eyes, He said these words.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'How the destruction of the Kurus has happened is
well known to you. All that was brought about by my fault though the
Kauravas approved of all my counsels. Fool that I was, I installed the
wicked minded Duryodhana, that enhancer of the terrors of kinsmen, to
rule over the Kurus. Vasudeva had said unto me, 'Let this sinful wretch
of wicked understanding be killed along with all his friends and
counsellors.' I did not listen to those words of grave import. All
wisemen gave me the same beneficial advice. Vidura, and Bhishma, and
Drona, and Kripa, said the same thing. The holy and high-souled Vyasa
repeatedly said the same, as also Sanjaya and Gandhari. Overwhelmed,
however, by filial affection, I could not follow that advice. Bitter
repentance is now my lot for my neglect. I also repent for not having
bestowed that blazing prosperity, derived from sires and grand sires, on
the high-souled Pandavas possessed of every accomplishment. The eldest
brother of Gada foresaw the destruction of all the kings; Janarddana,
however, regarded that destruction as highly beneficial.[2] So many
Anikas of troops, belonging tome, have been destroyed. Alas, my heart is
pierced with thousands of darts in consequence of all these results. Of
wicked understanding as I am, now after the lapse of five and ten years,
I am seeking to expiate my sins. Now at the fourth division of the day or
sometimes at the eighth division, with the regularity of a vow, I eat a
little food for simply conquering my thirst. Gandhari knows this. All my
attendants are under the impression that I eat as usual. Through fear of
Yudhishthira alone I concealed my acts, for if the eldest son of Pandu
came to know of my vow, he would feel great pain. Clad in deer-skin, I
lie down on the Earth, spreading a small quantity of Kusa grass, and pass
the time in silent recitations. Gandhari of great fame passes her time in
the observance of similar vows. Even thus do we both behave, we that have
lost a century of gong none of whom even retreated from battle. I do not,
however, grieve for those children of mine. They have all died in the
observance of Kshatriya duties.' Having said these words, the old king
then addressed Yudhishthira in particular and said, 'Blessed be thou, O
son of the princess of Yadu's race. Listen now to what I say. Cherished
by thee, O son, I have lived these years very happily. I have (with thy
help) made large gifts and performed Sraddhas repeatedly.[3] I have, O
son, to the best of my power, achieved merit largely. This Gandhari,
though destitute of sons, has lived with great fortitude, looking all the
while at me. They whom inflicted great wrongs on Draupadi and robbed thee
of thy affluence,--those cruel wights--have all left the world, slain in
battle agreeably to the practice of their order.
I have nothing to do for them, O delighter of the Kurus. Stain with their
faces towards battle, they have attained to those regions which are for
wielders of weapons.[4] I should now accomplish what is beneficial and
meritorious for me as also for Gandhari. It behoveth thee, O great king,
to grant me permission. Thou art the foremost of all righteous persons.
Thou art always devoted to righteousness. The king is the preceptor of
all creatures. It is for this that I say so. With thy permission, O hero,
I shall retire into the woods, clad in rags and barks. O king, alone with
this Gandhari, I shall live in the woods, always blessing thee. It is
meet, O son, for the members of our race, to make over sovereignty, when
old age comes, to children and lead the forest mode of life. Subsisting
there on air alone, or abstaining from all food, I shall, with this wife
of mine, O hero, practise severe austerities. Thou shalt be a sharer of
these penances, O son, for thou art the king. Kings are sharers of both
auspicious and inauspicious acts done in their kingdom.'[5]
"Yudhishthira said, 'When thou, O king, art thus subject to grief,
sovereignty does not please me at all. Fie on me that am of wicked
understanding, devoted to the pleasures of rule, and utterly heedless of
my true concerns. Alas, I, with all my brothers, was ignorant of thyself
having so long been afflicted with grief, emaciated with fasts,
abstaining from food, and lying on the bare ground. Alas, foolish that I
am, I have been deceived by thee that hast deep intelligence, inasmuch
as, having inspired me with confidence at first thou hast latterly
undergone such grief. What need have I of kingdom or of articles of
enjoyment, what need of sacrifices or of happiness, when thou, O king,
hast undergone go much affliction? I regard my kingdom as a disease, and
myself also as afflicted. Plunged though I am in sorrow, what, however,
is the use of these words that I am addressing thee? Thou art our father,
thou art our mother; thou art our foremost of superiors. Deprived of thy
presence, how shall we live? O best of king, let Yuyutsu, the son of thy
loins, be made king, or, indeed, anybody else whom thou mayst wish. I
shall go into the woods. Do thou rule the kingdom. It behoveth thee not
to burn me that am already burned by infamy. I am not the king. Thou art
the king. I am dependent on thy will. How can I dare grant permission to
thee that art my preceptor? O sinless one, I harbour no resentment in my
heart on account of the wrongs done to us by Suyodhana. It was ordained
that it should be so. Both ourselves and others were stupefied (by fate).
We are thy children as Duryodhana and others were. My conviction is that
Gandhari is as much my mother as Kunti. If thou, O king of kings, goest
to the woods leaving me, I shall the, follow thee. I swear by my soul.
This Earth, with her belt of seas, go full of wealth, will not be a
source of joy to me when I am deprived of thy presence. All this belongs
to thee. I gratify thee, bending my head. We are all dependent on thee, O
king of kings. Let the fever of thy heart be dispelled. I think, O lord
of Earth, that all this that has come upon thee is due to destiny. By
good luck, I had thought, that waiting upon thee and executing thy
commands obediently, I would rescue thee from the fever of thy heart.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O delighter of the Kurus, my mind is fixed, O son,
on penances. O puissant one, it is meet for our race that I should retire
into the woods. I have lived long under thy protection, O son, I have for
many years been served by thee with reverence. I am now old. It behoveth
thee, O king, to grant me permission (to take up my abode in the woods).'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said these words unto king Yudhishthira,
the just, king Dhritarashtra, the son of Amvika, trembling the while and
with hands joined together, further said unto the high-souled Sanjaya and
the great car-warrior Kripa, these words, 'I wish to solicit the king
through you. My mind has become cheerless, my mouth has become dry,
through the weakness of age and the exertion of speaking.' Having said
so, that perpetuator of Kuru's race, viz., the, righteous-souled old
king, blessed with prosperity, leaned on Gandhari and suddenly looked
like one deprived of life. Beholding him thus seated like one deprived of
consciousness, that slayer of hostile heroes, viz., the royal son of
Kunti, became penetrated by a poignant grief.
"Yudhishthira said, 'Alas, he whose strength was equal to that of a
hundred thousand elephants, alas, that king sitteth today, leaning on a
woman. Alas! he by whom the iron image of Bhima on a former occasion wag
reduced to fragments, leaneth today on a weak woman. Fie on me that am
exceedingly unrighteous! Fie on my understanding! Fie on my knowledge of
the scripture! Fie on me for whom this lord of Earth lieth today in a
manner that is not becoming of him! I also shall fast even as my
preceptor. Verily, I shall fast if this king and Gandhari of great fame
abstain from food.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The Pandava king, conversant with every duty,
using his own hand, then softly rubbed with cold water the breast and the
face of the old monarch. At the touch of the king's hand which was
auspicious and fragrant, and on which were jewels and medicinal herbs,
Dhritarashtra regained his senses.[6]
"Dhritarashtra said, 'Do thou again touch me, O son of Pandu, with thy
hand, and do thou embrace me. O thou of eyes like lotus petals, I am
restored to my senses through the auspicious touch of thy hand. O ruler
of men, I desire to smell thy head. The clasp of thy arms is highly
gratifying to me. This is the eighth division of the day and, therefore,
the hour of taking my food. For not having taken my food, O child of
Kuru's race, I am so weak as to be unable to move. In addressing my
solicitations to thee, great hag been my exertion. Rendered cheerless by
it, O son, I had fainted. O perpetuator of Kuru's race, I think that
receiving the touch of thy hand, which resembles nectar in its vivifying
effects I have been restored to my senses.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed, O Bharata, by the eldest brother of
his father, the son of Kunti, from affection, gently touched every part
of his body. Regaining his life-breaths, king Dhritarashtra embraced the
son of Pandu with his arms and smelled his head. Vidura and others wept
aloud in great grief. In consequence, however, of the poignancy of their
sorrow, they said nothing to either the old king or the son of Pandu.
Gandhari, conversant with every duty, bore her sorrow with fortitude, and
loaded as her heart was, O king, said nothing. The other ladies, Kunti
among them, became greatly afflicted. They wept, shedding copious tears,
and sat surrounding the old king. Then 'Dhritarashtra, once more
addressing Yudhishthira, said these words, Do thou, O king, grant me
permission to practise penances. By speaking repeatedly, O son, my mind
becomes weakened. It behoveth thee not, O son, to afflict me after this.'
When that foremost one of Kuru's race was saying go unto Yudhishthira, a
loud sound of wailing arose from all the warriors there present.
Beholding his royal father of great splendour, emaciated and pale,
reduced to a state unbecoming of him, worn out with fasts, and looking
like a skeleton covered with skin, Dharma's son Yudhishthira shed tears
of grief and once more said these words. 'O foremost of men, I do not
desire life and the Earth. O scorcher of foes, I shall employ myself in
doing what is agreeable to thee. If I deserve thy favour, if I am dear to
thee, do thou eat something. I shall then know what to do.' Endued with
great energy, Dhritarashtra then said to Yudhishthira,--'I wish, O son,
to take some food, with thy permission.' When Dhritarashtra said these
words to Yudhishthira, Satyavati's son Vyasa came there and said as
follows.`
