SECTION LXIII
"Janamejaya said, 'Having heard these words, O regenerate one, that were
spoken by the high-souled Vyasa in respect of the horse-sacrifice, what
steps were taken by Yudhishthira? Do thou tell me, O foremost of
regenerate ones, how the king succeeded in obtaining the wealth which
Marutta had buried in the Earth.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having heard the words of the Island-born ascetic,
king Yudhishthira the just, summoned all his brothers, viz., Arjuna and
Bhimasena and the twin sons of Madri, in proper time and then said unto
them (the following words),--'Ye heroes, you have heard the words which
the highly intelligent and high-souled Krishna has said from his
friendship for and the desire of doing good to the Kurus![178] Verily,
you have heard those words that have been uttered by that ascetic of
abundant penances, that great sage desirous of bestowing prosperity on
his friends, that preceptor of righteous behaviour, viz., Vyasa of
wonderful feats. You have heard what Bhishma also said, and what Govinda
too of great intelligence has uttered. Remembering those words, ye gong
of Pandu, I desire to obey them duly. By obeying those words of theirs
great blessedness will attach to all of you. Those words spoken by those
utterers of Brahma are certain (if obeyed) to bring in their train
considerable benefit. Ye perpetuators of Kuru's race, the Earth has
become divested of her wealth. Ye kings, Vyasa, therefore, informed us of
the wealth (that lies buried in the Earth) of Marutta. If you think that
wealth abundant or sufficient, how shall we bring it (to our capital)?
What, O Bhima, dost thou think as regards this? When the king, O
perpetuator of Kuru's race, said these words, Bhimasena, joining his
hands, said these words in reply,--'The words thou hast said, O thou of
mighty-arms, on the subject of bringing the wealth indicated by Vyasa,
are approved by me. If, O puissant one, we succeed in getting the wealth
kept there by the son of Avikshita, then this sacrifice, O king, purposed
by us will be easily accomplished. Even this is what I think. We shall,
therefore, bowing our heads unto the high-souled Girisa, and offering due
worship unto that deity, bring that wealth. Blessed be thou. Gratifying
that god of gods, as also his companions and followers, in words,
thought, and deed, we shall, without doubt, obtain that wealth. Those
Kinnaras of fierce mien who are protecting that treasure will certainly
yield to us if the great deity having the bull for his sign become
gratified with us!'--Hearing these words uttered by Bhima, O Bharata,
king Yudhishthira the son of Dharma became highly pleased. The others,
headed by Arjuna, at the same time, said, 'So be it.' The Pandavas then,
having resolved to bring that wealth, ordered their forces to march under
the constellation Dhruba and on the day called by the same name.[179]
Causing the Brahmanas to utter benedictions on them, and having duly
worshipped the great god Maheswara, the sons of Pandu get out (on their
enterprise). Gratifying that high-souled deity with Modakas and frumenty
and with cakes made of meat, the sons of Pandu set out with cheerful
hearts. While they thus set out, the citizen, and many foremost of
Brahmanas, with cheerful hearts, uttered auspicious blessings (on their
heads). The Pandavas, circumambulating many Brahmanas that daily
worshipped their fires, and bending their heads unto them, proceeded on
their journey. Taking the permission of king Dhritarashtra who was
afflicted with grief on account of the death of his sons, his queen
(Gandhari), and Pritha also of large eyes, and keeping the Kaurava prince
Yuyutsu, the son of Dhritarashtra, in the capital, they set out,
worshipped by the citizens and by many Brahmanas possessed of great
wisdom.'"
