SECTION LXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having heard these words of his son Vasudeva, that
descendant of Sura, of righteous soul, casting off his grief, made
excellent obsequial offerings (unto Abhimanyu). Vasudeva also performed
those rites for the ascension (to Heaven) of his high-souled nephew, that
hero who was ever the darling of his sire (Vasudeva). He duly fed six
millions of Brahmanas, endued with great energy, with edibles possessed
of every recommendation. Presenting many clothes unto them, Krishna
gratified the thirst for wealth of those Brahmanas. Wonderful were the
heaps of gold, the number of kine and of beds and clothes, that were then
given away. The Brahmanas loudly declared--'Let (Krishna's wealth)
increase.' Then Vasudeva of Dasarha's race, and Valadeva, and Satyaki,
and Satyaka, each performed the obsequial rites of Abhimanyu. Exceedingly
afflicted with grief, they failed to attain comfort. The same was the
case with the sons of Pandu in the city called after the elephant.
Deprived of Abhimanyu, they failed to obtain peace of mind. The daughter
of Virata, O monarch, for many days, totally abstained from all food,
exceedingly afflicted by grief on account of the death of her husband. At
this all her relatives became plunged into excess of grief. They all
feared that the embryo in her womb might be destroyed. Then Vyasa,
ascertaining the state of things by his spiritual vision, came there. The
highly intelligent Rishi, endued with great energy, arrived (at the
palace), addressed Pritha of large eyes, as also Uttara herself,
saying,--'Let this grief be abandoned. O famous lady, a son endued with
mighty energy will be born to thee, through the puissance of Vasudeva and
at my word. That son will rule the Earth after the Pandavas (have
departed from it).' Beholding Dhananjaya, he said unto him, in the
hearing of king Yudhishthira the just, and gladdening him with his words,
'O Bharata.--'The grandson, O highly blessed one, will become a
high-souled prince. He will righteously rule the whole Earth to the verge
of the sea. Therefore, O foremost one of Kuru's race, cast off this
grief, O mower of foes. Do not doubt this. This will truly happen. That
which was uttered by the Vrishni hero on a former occasion, will, without
doubt, happen. Do not think otherwise. As regards Abhimanyu, he has gone
to the regions of the deities, conquered by him with his own acts. That
hero should not be grieved for by thee or, indeed, by the other Kurus.'
Thus addressed by his grandsire, Dhananjaya of righteous soul, O king,
cast off his grief and even became cheerful. Thy sire, O prince, that art
conversant with all duties, began to grow in that womb, O thou of great
intelligence, like the Moon in the lighted fortnight. Then Vyasa urged
the royal son of Dharma for performing the horse-sacrifice. Having said
so, he made himself invisible there and then. The intelligent king
Yudhishthira the just, hearing the words of Vyasa, set his mind on the
journey for bringing wealth (for the sacrifice).'"
