SECTION LVII
"Vaisampayana said, "Beholding the king, who had become so, of frightful
mien, wearing a long beard smeared with the blood of human beings, the
Brahmana Utanka, O king, did not become agitated. That monarch of great
energy, inspiring terror in every breast and looking like a second Yama,
rising up, addressed Utanka, saying,--'By good luck, O best of Brahmanas,
thou hast come to me at the sixth hour of the day when I am in search of
food.'
"Utanka said, 'O king, know that I have come hither in course of my
wanderings for the sake of my preceptor. The wise have said that I while
one is employed for the sake of one's preceptor, one should not be
injured.'
"The king said, 'O best of Brahmanas, food has been ordained for me at
the sixth hour of the day. I am hungry. I cannot, therefore, allow thee
to escape today.'
"Utanka said, 'Let it be so, O king. Let this compact be made with me.
After I have ceased to wander for my preceptor, I shall once more come
and place myself within thy power. It has been heard by me, O best of
kings, that the object I seek for my preceptor is under thy control, O
monarch. Therefore, O ruler of men, I solicit thee for it. Thou daily
givest many foremost of gems unto superior Brahmanas. Thou art a giver, O
chief of men, from whom gifts may be accepted, know that I too am a
worthy object of charity present before thee, O best of kings. Having
accepted from thee in gift that object for my preceptor which is under
thy control, I shall, O king, in consequence of my compact, once more
come back to thee and place myself under thy power. I assure thee truly
of this. There is no falsehood in this. Never before have I spoken
anything untrue, no, not even in jest. What shall I say then of other
occasions?'
"Saudasa said, 'If the object thou seekest for thy preceptor is capable
of being placed in thy hands by me, if I be regarded as one from whom a
gift may be accepted, do thou then say what that object is.'
"Utanka said, 'O foremost of men, O Saudasa, in my estimation thou art a
worthy person from whom gifts may be accepted. I have, therefore, come to
thee for begging of thee the jewelled ear-rings (worn by thy queen).'
"Saudasa said, 'Those jewelled ear-rings, O learned and regenerate Rishi,
belong to my wife. They should be asked from her. Do thou, therefore,
solicit some other thing from me. I shall give it to thee, O thou of
excellent vows.'
"Utanka said, 'If we be regarded as any authority, do thou cease then to
urge this pretext. Do thou give those jewelled ear-rings to me. Be thou
truthful in speech, O king.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, the king once more addressed
Utanka and said unto him, 'Do thou, at my word, go to my venerable queen,
O best of men, and ask her, saying,--Give!--She of pure vows, thus
solicited by thee, will certainly, at my command, give thee, O foremost
of regenerate persons, those jewelled ear-rings of hers without doubt.'
"Utanka said, 'Whither, O ruler of men, shall I be able to meet thy
queen? Why dost thou not thyself go to her?'
"Saudasa said, 'Thou wilt find her today in the vicinity of a foremost
fountain. I cannot see her today as the sixth hour of the day has come.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, Utanka, O chief of Bharata's
race, then left that spot. Beholding Madayanti, he informed her of his
object. Hearing the command of Saudasa, that lady of large eyes replied
unto the highly intelligent Utanka, O Janamejaya, in these words: 'It is
even so, O regenerate one. Thou shouldst, however, O sinless one, assure
me that thou dost not say what is untrue. It behoves thee to bring me
some sign from my husband. These celestial ear-rings of mine, made of
costly gems, are such that the deities and Yakshas and great Rishis
always watch for opportunities for bearing them away. If placed at any
time on the Earth, this costly article would then be stolen by the Nagas.
If worn by one who is impure in consequence of eating, it would then be
taken away by the Yakshas. If the wearer falls asleep (without taking
care of these precious ear-rings) the deities would then take them away.
O best of Brahmanas, these ear-rings are capable of being taken away,
when such opportunities present themselves, by deities and Rakshasas and
Nagas, if worn by a heedless person. O best of regenerate ones, these
ear-rings, day and night, always produce gold. At night, they shine
brightly, attracting the rays of stars and constellations. O holy one, if
worn by any one, he would be freed from hunger and thirst and fear of
every kind. The wearer of these ear-rings is freed also from the fear of
poison and fire and every kind of danger. If worn by one of short
stature, these become short. If worn by one of tall stature, these grow
in size. Even of such virtues are these ear-rings of mine. They are
praised and honoured everywhere. Indeed, they are known over the three
worlds. Do thou, therefore, bring me some sign (from my husband).'"
