SECTION XLVI
"Brahmana said, 'Duly studying thus to the best of his power, in the way
described above, and likewise living as a Brahmacharin, one that is
devoted to the duties of one's own order, possessed of learning,
observant of penances, and with all the senses under restraint, devoted
to what is agreeable and beneficial to the preceptor, steady in
practising the duty of truth, and always pure, should, with the
permission of the preceptor, eat one's food without decrying it. He
should eat Havishya made from what is obtained in alms, and should stand,
sit, and take exercise (as directed).[136] He should pour libations on
the fire twice a day, having purified himself and with concentrated mind.
He should always bear a staff made of Vilwa or Palasa.[137] The robes of
the regenerate man should be linen, or of cotton, or deer-skin, or a
cloth that is entirely brown-red. There should also be a girdle made of
Munja-grass. He should bear matted locks on head, and should perform his
ablutions every day. He should bear the sacred thread, study the
scriptures, divest himself of cupidity, and be steady in the observance
of vows. He should also gratify the deities with oblations of pure water,
his mind being restrained the while. Such a Brahmacharin is worthy of
applause. With vital seed drawn up and mind concentrated, one that is
thus devoted succeeds in conquering Heaven. Having attained to the
highest seat, he has not to return to birth. Cleansed by all purificatory
rites and having lived as a Brahmacharin, one should next go out of one's
village and next live as an ascetic in the woods, having renounced (all
attachments). Clad in animal skins or barks of trees he should perform
his ablutions morning and evening. Always living within the forest, he
should never return to an inhabited place. Honouring guests when they
come, he should give them shelter, and himself subsist upon fruits and
leaves and common roots, and Syamaka. He should, without being slothful
subsist on such water as he gets, and air, and all forest products. He
should live upon these, in due order, according to the regulations of his
initiation.[138] He should honour the guest that comes to him with alms
of fruits and roots. He should then, without sloth, always give whatever
other food he may have. Restraining speech the while, he should eat after
gratifying deities and guests. His mind should be free from envy. He
should eat little, and depend always on the deities. Self-restrained,
practising universal compassion, and possessed of forgiveness, he should
wear both beard and hair (without submitting to the operations of the
barber). Performing sacrifices and devoting himself to the study of the
scriptures, he should be steady in the observance of the duty of truth.
With body always in a state of purity, endued with cleverness, ever
dwelling in the forest, with concentrated mind, and senses in subjection,
a forest-recluse, thus devoting himself, would conquer Heaven. A
householder, or Brahmacharin, or forest-recluse, who would wish to
achieve Emancipation, should have recourse to that which has been called
the best course of conduct. Having granted unto all creatures the pledge
of utter abstention from harm, he should thoroughly renounce all action.
He should contribute to the happiness of all creatures, practise
universal friendliness, subjugate all his senses, and be an ascetic.
Subsisting upon food obtained without asking and without trouble, and
that has come to him spontaneously, he should make a fire. He should make
his round of mendicancy in a place whence smoke has ceased to curl up and
where all the inhabitants have already eaten.[139] The person who is
conversant with the conduct that leads to Emancipation should seek for
alms after the vessels (used in cooking) have been washed. He should
never rejoice when he obtains anything, and never be depressed if he
obtains nothing. Seeking just what is needed for supporting life, he
should, with concentrated mind, go about his round of mendicancy, waiting
for the proper time. He should not wish for earnings in common with
others, nor eat when honoured. The man who leads the life of mendicancy
should conceal himself for avoiding gifts with honour. While eating, he
should not eat such food as forms the remains of another's dish, nor such
as is bitter, or astringent, or pungent. He should not also eat such
kinds of food as have a sweet taste. He should eat only so much as is
needed to keep him alive. The person conversant with Emancipation should
obtain his subsistence without obstructing any creature. In his rounds of
mendicancy he should never follow another (bent on the same purpose). He
should never parade his piety; he should move about in a secluded place,
freed from passion. Either an empty house, or a forest, or the foot of
some tree, or a river, or a mountain-cave, he should have recourse to for
shelter. In summer he should pass only one night in an inhabited place;
in the season of rains he may live in one place. He should move about the
world like a worm, his path pointed out by the Sun. From compassion for
creatures, he should walk on the Earth with his eyes directed towards it.
He should never make any accumulations and should avoid residence with
friends. The man conversant with Emancipation should every day do all his
acts with pure water. Such a man should always perform his ablutions with
water that has been fetched up (from the river or the tank).[140]
Abstention from harm, Brahmacharyya, truth, simplicity, freedom from
wrath, freedom from decrying others, self-restraint, and habitual freedom
from backbiting: these eight vows, with senses restrained, he should
steadily pursue. He should always practise a sinless mode of conduct,
that is not deceptive and not crooked. Freed from attachment, he should
always make one who comes as a guest eat (at least) a morsel of food. He
should eat just enough for livelihood, for the support of life. He should
eat only such food as has been obtained by righteous means, and should
not pursue the dictates of desire. He should never accept any other thing
than food and clothing only. He should, again, accept only as much as he
can eat and nothing more. He should not be induced to accept gifts from
others, nor should he make gifts to others. Owing to the helplessness of
creatures, the man of wisdom should always share with others. He should
not appropriate what belongs to others, nor should he take anything
without being asked. He should not, having enjoyed anything become so
attached to it as to desire to have it once more. One should take only
earth and water and pebbles and leaves and flowers and fruits, that are
not owned by any body, as they come, when one desires to do any act. One
should not live by the occupation of an artisan, nor should one covet
gold. One should not hate, nor teach (one that does not seek to be
taught); nor should one have any belongings. One should eat only what is
consecrated by faith. One should abstain from controversies. One should
follow that course of conduct which has been said to be nectarine. One
should never be attached to anything, and should never enter into
relations of intimacy with any creature. One should not perform, nor
cause to perform, any such action as involves expectation of fruit or
destruction of life or the hoarding of wealth or articles. Rejecting all
objects, content with a very little, one should wander about (homeless)
pursuing an equal behaviour towards all creatures mobile and immobile.
One should never annoy another being; not should one be annoyed with
another. He who is trusted by all creatures is regarded as the foremost
of those persons that understand Emancipation. One should not think of
the past, nor feel anxious about the future. One should disregard the
present, biding time, with concentrated mind.[141] One should never
defile anything by eye, mind, or speech. Nor should one do anything that
is wrong, openly or in secret. Withdrawing one's senses like the tortoise
withdrawing its limbs, one should attenuate one's senses and mind,
cultivate a thoroughly peaceful understanding, and seek to master every
topic. Freed from all pairs of opposites, never bending one's head in
reverence, abstaining from the rites requiring the utterance of Swaha,
one should be free from mineness, and egoism. With cleansed soul, one
should never seek to acquire what one has not and protect what one has.
Free from expectations, divested of qualities, wedded to tranquillity,
one should be free from all attachments and should depend on none.
Attached to one's own self and comprehending all topics, one becomes
emancipated without doubt. Those who perceive the self, which is without
hands and feet and back, which is without head and without stomach, which
is free from the operation of all qualities, which is absolute,
untainted, and stable, which is without smell, without taste, and touch,
without colour, and without sound, which is to be comprehended (by close
study), which is unattached, which is without flesh, which is free from
anxiety, unfading, and divine, and, lastly, which though dwelling in a
house resides in all creatures, succeed in escaping death. There the
understanding reaches not, nor the senses, nor the deities, nor the
Vedas, nor sacrifices, nor the regions (of superior bliss), nor penance,
nor vows. The attainment to it by those who are possessed of knowledge is
said to be without comprehension of symbols. Hence, the man who knows the
properties of that which is destitute of symbols, should practise the
truths of piety.[142] The learned man, betaking himself to a life of
domesticity, should adopt that conduct which is conformable to true
knowledge. Though undeluded, he should practise piety after the manner of
one that is deluded, without finding fault with it. Without finding fault
with the practices of the good, he should himself adopt such a conduct
for practising piety as may induce others to always disrespect him. That
man who is endued with such a conduct is said to be the foremost of
ascetics. The senses, the objects of the senses, the (five) great
elements, mind, understanding, egoism, the unmanifest, Purusha also,
after comprehending these duly with the aid of correct inferences, one
attains to Heaven, released from all bonds. One conversant with the
truth, understanding these at the time of the termination of his life,
should meditate, exclusively resting on one point. Then, depending on
none, one attains to Emancipation. Freed from all attachments, like the
wind in space, with his accumulations exhausted, without distress of any
kind, he attains to his highest goal.'"
