SECTION LXVIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed, O king, (by his sister and others),
the slayer of Kesin, exceedingly afflicted by grief, answered,--'So be
it!'--These words were uttered with sufficient loudness and they
gladdened all the inmates of the inner apartments of the palace. The
puissant Krishna, that foremost of men, by uttering these words,
gladdened all the people assembled there, like one pouring cold water on
a person afflicted with sweat. He then quickly entered the lying-in room
in which thy sire was born. It was duly sanctified, O chief of men, with
many garlands of white flowers, with many well-filled water pots arranged
on every side; with charcoal, soaked in ghee, of Tinduka wood, and
mustard seeds, O thou of mighty arms; with shining weapons properly
arrayed, and several fires on every side. And it was peopled by many
agreeable and aged dames summoned for waiting (upon thy grandmother). It
was also surrounded by many well-skilled and clever physicians, O thou of
great intelligence. Endued with great energy, he also saw there all
articles that are destructive of Rakshasas, duly placed by persons
conversant with the subject. Beholding the lying-in room in which thy
sire was born thus equipt, Hrishikesa became very glad and
said,--'Excellent, Excellent!' When he of Vrishni's race said so and
presented such a cheerful countenance, Draupadi, repairing thither with
great speed, addressed the daughter of Virata, saying,--'O blessed lady,
here comes to thee thy father-in-law, the slayer of Madhu, that ancient
Rishi of inconceivable soul, that unvanquished one.'--Virata's daughter,
checking her tears, said these words in a voice suffocated with grief.
Covering herself properly, the princess waited for Krishna like the
deities reverentially waiting for him. The helpless lady, with heart
agitated by grief, beholding Govinda coming, indulged in these
lamentations; O lotus-eyed one, behold us two deprived of our child. O
Janarddana, both Abhimanyu and myself have been equally slain. O thou of
Vrishni's race, O slayer of Madhu, I seek to gratify thee by bending my
head, O hero, unto thee. Do thou revive this child of mine that has been
consumed by the weapon of Drona's son. If king Yudhishthira the just, or
Bhimasena, or thyself, O lotus-eyed one, had, on that occasion, said,
'Let the blade of grass (inspired by Aswatthaman into a Brahma-weapon)
destroy the unconscious mother'--O puissant one, then I would have been
destroyed and this (sad occurrence) would not have happened. Alas, what
benefit has been reaped by Drona's son by accomplishing this cruel deed,
viz., the destruction of the child in the womb by his Brahma-weapon. The
self-same mother now seeks to gratify thee, O slayer of foes, by bending
her head. Surely, O Govinda, I shall cast off my life-breaths if this
child does not revive. In him, O righteous one, were placed many
expectations by me. Alas, when these have been frustrated by Drona's son,
what need have I, O Kesava, to bear, the burden of life? The hope, O
Krishna, was cherished by me that with my child on my lap, O Janarddana,
I would salute thee with reverence. Alas, O Kesava, that hope has been
destroyed. O foremost of all beings, at the death of this heir of
Abhimanyu of restless eyes, all the hopes in my breast have been
destroyed. Abhimanyu of restless eyes, O slayer of Madhu, was exceedingly
dear to thee. Behold this child of his slain by the Brahma-weapon. This
child is very ungrateful and very heartless, like his sire, for, behold,
disregarding the prosperity and affluence of the Pandavas, he has gone to
Yama's abode. I had, before this, vowed, O Kesava, that if Abhimanyu fell
on the field of battle, O hero, I would follow him without any loss of
time. I did not, however, keep my vow, cruel that I am and fond of life.
If I repair to him now, what, indeed, will Phalguna's son say?'"
