SECTION XVII
"Kunti said, 'It is even so, O mighty-armed son of Pandu, as thou sayest.
Ye kings, formerly when ye were cheerless, it was even in this way that I
excited you all. Yes, seeing that your kingdom was wrested from you by a
match at dice, seeing that you all fell from happiness, seeing that you
were domineered over by kinsmen, I instilled courage and high thoughts
into your minds. Ye foremost of men, I encouraged you in order that they
that were the sons of Pandu might not be lost, in order that their fame
might not be lost. You are all equal to Indra. Your prowess resembles
that of the very gods. In order that you might not live, watching the
faces of others, I acted in that way.[34] I instilled courage into thy
heart in order that thou who art the foremost of all righteous persons,
who art equal to Vasava, might not again go into the woods and live in
misery. I instilled courage into your hearts in order that this Bhima who
is possessed of the strength of ten thousand elephants and whose prowess
and manliness are widely known, might not sink into insignificance and
ruin. I instilled courage into your hearts in order that this Vijaya, who
was born after Bhimasena, and who is equal unto Vasava himself might not
be cheerless. I instilled courage into your hearts in order that Nakula
and Sahadeva, who are always devoted to their seniors, might not be
weakened and rendered cheerless by hunger. I acted in that way in order
that this lady of well-developed proportions and of large expansive eyes
might not endure the wrongs inflicted on her in the public hall without
being avenged. In the very sight of you all, O Bhima, Dussasana, through
folly, dragged her trembling all over like a plantain plant, during the
period of her functional illness, and after she had been won at dice, as
if she were a slave. All this was known to me. Indeed, the race of Pandu
had been subjugated (by foes). The Kurus, viz., my father-in-law and
others, were cheerless when she, desirous of a protector, uttered loud
lamentations like a she-osprey. When she was dragged by her fair locks by
the sinful Dussasana with little intelligence, I was deprived of my
senses, O king. Know, that for enhancing your energy, I instilled that
courage into your hearts by reciting the words of Vidula, O my sons. I
instilled courage into your hearts, O my sons, in order that the race of
Pandu, represented by my children, might not be lost. The sons and
grandsons of that person who brings a race to infamy never succeed in
attaining to the regions of the righteous. Verily, the ancestors of the
Kaurava race were in danger of losing those regions of felicity which had
become theirs. As regards myself, O my sons, I, before this, enjoyed the
great fruits of that sovereignty which my husband had acquired. I made
large gifts. I duly drank the Soma juice in sacrifice.[35] It was not for
my own sake that I had urged Vasudeva with the stirring words of Vidula.
It was for your sake that I had called upon you to follow that advice. O
my sons, I do not desire the fruits of that sovereignty which has been
won by my children. O thou of great puissance, I wish to attain, by my
penances, to those regions of felicity which have been acquired by my
husband. By rendering obedient service to my father-in-law and
mother-in-law both of whom wish to take up their abode in the woods, and
by penances, I desire, O Yudhishthira, to waste my body. Do thou cease to
follow me, O foremost one of Kuru's race, along with Bhima and others.
Let thy understanding be always devoted to righteousness. Let thy mind be
always great.'"
