SECTION XIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by king Yudhishthira, Vidura, that
foremost of all intelligent persons, returned to Dhritarashtra and said
unto him these words of grave import. 'I at first reported thy message to
king Yudhishthira. Reflecting on thy words, Yudhishthira of great
splendour applauded them highly. Vibhatsu also, of great energy, places
all his mansions, with all the wealth therein, as also his very
life-breaths, at thy disposal. Thy son, king Yudhishthira, too, offers
thee, O royal sage, his kingdom and life-breath and wealth and all else
that belongs to him. Bhima, however, of mighty arms, recollecting all his
innumerable sorrows, has with difficulty given his consent, breathing
many heavy sighs. That mighty-armed hero, O monarch, was solicited by the
righteous king as also by Vibhatsu, and induced to assume relations of
cordiality towards thee. King Yudhishthira the just, his prayed thee not
to give way to dissatisfaction for the improper conduct which Bhima has
displayed at the recollection of former hostilities. This is generally
the behaviour of Kshatriyas in battle, O king, and this Vrikodara is
devoted to battle and the practices of Kshatriyas. Both myself and
Arjuna, O king, repeatedly beg thee for pardoning Vrikodara. Be gracious
unto us. Thou art our lord. Whatever wealth we have, thou mayst give away
as thou likest, O ruler of Earth. Thou, O Bharata. art the Master of this
kingdom and of all lives in it. Let the foremost one of Kuru's race give
away, for the obsequial rites of his sons, all those foremost of gifts
which should be given to the Brahmanas. Indeed, let him make those gifts
unto persons of the regenerate order, taking away from our mansions
jewels and gems, and kine, and slaves both mate and female, and goats and
sheep. Let gifts be made unto also those that are poor or sightless or in
great distress, selecting the objects of his charity as he likes. Let, O
Vidura, large pavilions be constructed, rich with food and drink of
diverse tastes collected in profusion. Let reservoirs of water be
constructed for enabling kine to drink, and let other works of merit be
accomplished.--Even these were the words said unto me by the king as also
by Pritha's son Dhananjaya. It behoveth thee to say what should be done
next. After Vidura had said these words, O Janamejaya, Dhritarashtra his
satisfaction at them and set his heart upon making large presents on the
day of full moon in the month of Kartika."'
