SECTION LXXIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'The ruler of Manipura, Vabhruvahana, hearing that
his sire Arjuna had arrived within his dominions, went out with humility,
with a number of Brahmanas and some treasure in his van.[194]
Remembering, however, the duties of Kshatriyas, Dhananjaya of great
intelligence, seeing the ruler of Manipura arrive in that guise, did not
approve of it. The righteous-souled Phalguna angrily said, 'This conduct
of thine is not becoming. Thou hast certainly fallen away from Kshatriya
duties. I have come here as the protector of Yudhishthira's sacrificial
horse. Why, O son, wilt thou not fight me, seeing that I have come within
thy dominions? Fie on thee, O thou of foolish understanding, fie on thee
that hast fallen away from Kshatriya duties! Fie on thee that would
receive me peacefully, even though I have come here for battling with
thee. In thus receiving me peacefully thou actest like a woman. O thou of
wretched understanding, if I had come to thee, leaving aside my arms,
then would this behaviour of thine have been fit, O worst of men.'
Learning that these words were addressed by her husband, the daughter of
the Snake-king, viz., Ulupi unable to tolerate it, pierced through the
Earth and came up to that spot.[195] She beheld her son standing there
perfectly cheerless and with face hanging down. Indeed, the prince was
repeatedly rebuked by his sire who was desirous of battle with him, O
monarch. The daughter of the snake, with every limb possessed of beauty,
viz., Ulupi, said these words consistent with righteousness and duty unto
the prince who was conversant with righteousness and duty,--'Know that I
am thy mother Ulupi that am the daughter of a snake. Do thou accomplish
my behest, O son, for thou wouldst then attain to great merit. Fight thy
father, this foremost one of Kuru's race, this hero that is irresistible
in battle. Without doubt, he will then be gratified with thee.' In this
way was king Vabhruvahana incited against his sire by his (step) mother.
At last, endued as he was with great energy, he made up his mind, O chief
of the Bharata's, to fight Dhananjaya. Putting on his armour of bright
gold and his effulgent head-gear, he ascended an excellent car which had
hundreds of quivers ready on it. That car was equipt with necessaries for
battle and had steeds yoked to it that were endued with the speed of the
mind. It had excellent wheels and a strong Upashkara, and was adorned
with golden ornaments of every kind. Raising his standard which was
decorated most beautifully and which bore the device of a lion in gold,
the handsome prince Vabhruvahana proceeded against his sire for battle.
Coining upon the sacrificial steed which was protected by Partha, the
heroic prince caused it to be seized by persons well-versed in
horse-lore. Beholding the steed seized, Dhananjaya became filled with
joy. Standing on the Earth, that hero began to resist the advance of his
son who was on his car. The king afflicted the hero with repeated showers
of shafts endued with whetted points and resembling snakes of virulent
poison. The battle that took, place between sire and son was
incomparable. It resembled the encounter between the deities and the
Asuras of old. Each was gratified with obtaining the other for an
antagonist. Then Vabhruvahana, laughing, pierced the diadem-decked
Arjuna, that foremost of men, in the shoulder with a straight shaft.
Equipt with feathers, that shaft penetrated Arjuna's body like a snake
penetrating on an anthill. Piercing the son of Kunti through, the shaft
went deep into the Earth. Feeling acute pain, the intelligent Dhananjaya
rested awhile, supporting himself on his excellent bow. He stood, having
recourse to his celestial energy and seemed to outward appearance like
one deprived of life. That foremost of men, then regaining consciousness,
praised his son highly. Possessed of great splendour, the son of Sakra
said, 'Excellent, Excellent, O mighty-armed one, O son of Chitrangada! O
son, beholding this feat, so worthy of thee, I am highly gratified with
thee. I shall now shoot these arrows at thee, O son. Stand for fight
(without running away).' Having said these words, that slayer of foes
shot a shower of arrows on the prince. King Vabhruvahana, however, with
his own broad-headed shafts, cut all those arrows which were shot from
Gandiva and which resembled the thunder-bolt of Indra in splendour, some
in twain and some into three parts. Then the standard, decked with gold
and resembling a golden palmyra, on the king's car was cut off by Partha
with some excellent shafts of his. The son of Pandu, laughing, next slew
the king's steeds endued with large size and great speed. Descending from
his car, the king inflamed with rage, fought his sire on foot. Gratified
with the prowess of his son, that foremost one of the sons of Pritha,
viz., the son of the wielder of the thunder-bolt, began to afflict him
greatly. The mighty Vabhruvahana, thinking that his father was no longer
able to face him, again afflicted him with many shafts resembling snakes
of virulent poison. From a spirit of boyishness he then vigorously
pierced his father in the breast with a whetted shaft equipt with
excellent wings. That shaft, O king, penetrated the body of Pandu's son
and reaching his very vital caused him great pain. The delighter of the
Kurus, Dhananjaya, deeply pierced therewith by his son, then fell down in
a swoon on the Earth, O king. When that hero, that bearer of the burthens
of the Kuru's fell down, the son of Chitrangada also became deprived of
his senses. The latter's swoon was due to his exertions in battle as also
to his grief at seeing his sire slain. He had been pierced deeply by
Arjuna with clouds of arrows. He, therefore, fell down at the van of
battle embracing the Earth. Rearing that her husband had been slain and
that her son had fallen down on the Earth, Chitrangada, in great
agitation of mind, repaired to the field of battle. Her heart burning
with sorrow, weeping piteously the while, and trembling all over, the
mother of the ruler of Manipura saw her slain husband."'
