SECTION LXXXVII
"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard, O Krishna, thy agreeable words. They
are such as deserve to be spoken by thee. Gladsome and sweet as nectar
are they, indeed, they fill my heart with great pleasure, O puissant one.
O Hrishikesa, I have heard that innumerable have been the battles which
Vijaya has fought with the kings of the Earth. For what reason is Partha
always dissociated from ease and comfort? Vijaya is exceedingly
intelligent. This, therefore, pains my heart very much. I always, O
Janarddana, think, when I am withdrawn from business, of Kunti's son
Jishnu. The lot of that delighter of the Pandus is exceedingly miserable.
His body has every auspicious mark. What, however, O Krishna, is that
sign in his excellent body in consequence of which he has always to
endure misery and discomfort? That son of Kunti has to bear an
exceedingly large share of unhappiness. I do not see any censurable
indication in his body. It behoves thee to explain the cause to me it I
deserve to hear it. Thus addressed, Hrishikesa, that enhancer of the
glory of the Bhoja princes, having reflected for a long time, answered as
follows--'I do not see any censurable feature in this prince, except that
the cheek bones of this lion among men are a little too high. It is in
consequence of this that that foremost of men has always to be on the
road. I really do not see anything else in consequence of which he could
be made so unhappy.' Thus answered by Krishna of great intelligence, that
foremost of men, viz., king Yudhishthira, said unto the chief of the
Vrishnis that it was even so. The princess Draupadi, however, looked
angrily and askance at Krishna, (for she could not bear the ascription of
any fault to Arjuna). The slayer of Kesi, viz., Hrishikesa, approved of
that indication of love (for his friend) which the princess of Panchala,
who also was his friend, displayed.[204] Bhimasena and the other Kurus,
including the sacrificial priests, who heard of the agreeable triumphs of
Arjuna in course of his following the horse, became highly gratified.
While they were still engaged in discoursing on Arjuna, an envoy came
from that high-souled hero bearing a message from him. Repairing to the
presence of the Kuru king, the intelligent envoy bowed his head in
reverence and informed him of the arrival of that foremost of men, viz.,
Phalguna. On receipt of this intelligence, tears of joy covered the
king's eyes. Large gifts were made to the messenger for the very
agreeable tidings he had brought. On the second day from that date, a
loud din was heard when that foremost of men, that chief of the Kurus,
came. The dust raised by the hoofs of that horse as it walked in close
adjacence to Arjuna, looked as beautiful as that raised by the celestial
steed Uchchaisravas. And as Arjuna advanced he heard many gladdening
words uttered by the citizens. 'By good luck, O Partha, thou art out of
danger. Praise to you and king Yudhishthira! Who else than Arjuna could
come back after having caused the horse to wander over the whole Earth
and after having vanquished all the kings in battle? We have not heard of
such a feat having been achieved by even Sagara and other high-souled
kings of antiquity. Future kings also will never be able to accomplish so
difficult a feat, O foremost one of Kuru's race, as this which thou hast
achieved.' Listening to such words, agreeable to the ear, of the
citizens, the righteous-souled Phalguna entered the sacrificial compound.
Then king Yudhishthira with all his ministers, and Krishna, the delighter
of the Yadus, placing Dhritarashtra in their van, went out for receiving
Dhananjaya. Saluting the feet of his sire (Dhritarashtra), and then of
king Yudhishthira the just of great wisdom, and then worshipping Bhima
and others, he embraced Kesava. Worshipped by them all and worshipping
them in return according to due rites, the mighty-armed hero, accompanied
by those princes, took rest like a ship-wrecked man tossed on the waves
resting on reaching the shore. Meanwhile king Vabhruvahan of great
wisdom, accompanied by his mothers (Chitrangada and Ulupi), came to the
Kuru capital. The mighty-armed prince duly saluted all his seniors of
Kuru's race and the other kings present there, and was honoured by them
all in return. He then entered the excellent abode of his grand-mother
Kunti."'
