
SECTION CCVI
"Vaisampayana said, 'After Bhishma had concluded, Drona spoke, saying, 'O
king Dhritarashtra, it hath been heard by us that friends summoned for
consultation should always speak what is right, true, and conductive to
fame. O sire, I am of the same mind in this matter with the illustrious
Bhishma. Let a share of the kingdom be given unto the Pandavas. This is
eternal virtue. Send, O Bharata, unto Drupada without loss of time some
messenger of agreeable speech, carrying with him a large treasure for the
Pandavas. And let the man go unto Drupada carrying costly presents for
both the bridegrooms and the bride, and let him speak unto that monarch
of thy increase of power and dignity arising from this new alliance with
him. And, O monarch, let the man know also that both thyself and
Duryodhana have become exceedingly glad in consequence of what hath
happened. Let him say this repeatedly unto Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna.
And let him speak also about the alliance as having been exceedingly
proper, and agreeable unto thee, and of thyself being worthy of it. And
let the man repeatedly propitiate the sons of Kunti and those of Madri
(in proper words). And at thy command, O king, let plenty of ornaments of
pure gold be given unto Draupadi. And let, O bull of Bharata's race,
proper presents be given unto all the sons of Drupada. Let the messenger
then propose the return of the Pandavas to Hastinapura. After the heroes
will have been permitted (by Drupada), to come hither, let Duhsasana and
Vikarna go out with a handsome train to receive them. And when they will
have arrived at Hastinapura, let those foremost of men be received with
affection by thee. And let them then be installed on their paternal
throne, agreeably to the wishes of the people of the realm. This, O
monarch of Bharata's race, is what I think should be thy behaviour
towards the Pandavas who are to thee even as thy own sons.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'After Drona had ceased, Karna spake again,
'Both Bhishma and Drona have been pampered with wealth that is thine and
favours conferred by thee! They are also always regarded by thee as thy
trusted friends! What can therefore be more amusing than that they both
should give thee advice which is not for thy good? How can the wise
approve that advice which is pronounced good by a person speaking with
wicked intent but taking care to conceal the wickedness of his heart?
Indeed, in a season of distress, friends can neither benefit nor injure.
Every one's happiness or the reverse dependeth on destiny. He that is
wise and he that is foolish, he that is young (in years) and he that is
old, he that hath allies and he that hath none, all become, it is seen
everywhere, happy or unhappy at times. It hath been heard by us that
there was, of old, a king by name Amvuvicha. Having his capital at
Rajagriha, he was the king of all the Magadha chiefs. He never attended
to his affairs. All his exertion consisted in inhaling the air. All his
affairs were in the hands of his minister. And his minister, named
Mahakarni, became the supreme authority in the state. Regarding himself
all powerful, he began to disregard the king. And the wretch himself
appropriated everything belonging unto the king, his queens and treasures
and sovereignty. But the possession of all these, instead of satisfying
his avarice, only served to inflame him the more. Having appropriated
everything belonging to the king, he even coveted the throne. But it hath
been heard by us that with all his best endeavours he succeeded not in
acquiring the kingdom of the monarch, his master, even though the latter
was inattentive to business and content with only breathing the air. What
else can be said, O king, than that monarch's sovereignty was dependent
on destiny? If, therefore, O king, this kingdom be established in thee by
destiny, it will certainly continue in thee, even if the whole world were
to become thy enemy! If, however, destiny hath ordained otherwise,
howsoever mayest thou strive, it will not last in thee! O learned one,
remembering all this, judge of the honesty or otherwise of thy advisers.
Ascertain also who amongst them are wicked and who have spoken wisely and
well.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Karna, Drona replied,
'As thou art wicked it is evident thou sayest so in consequence of the
wickedness of thy intent. It is for injuring the Pandavas that thou
findest fault with us. But know, O Karna, what I have said is for the
good of all and the prosperity of the Kuru race. If thou regardest all
this as productive of evil, declare thyself what is for our good. If the
good advice I have given be not followed, I think the Kurus will be
exterminated in no time.'"
