SECTION LVI
"Janamejaya said, 'With what penances was the high-souled Utanka endued
so that he entertained the wish to denounce a curse on Vishnu himself,
who is the source of all puissance?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'O Janamejaya, Utanka was endued with austere
penances. He was devoted to his preceptor. Endued with great energy, he
abstained from worshipping anybody else. All the children of the Rishis O
Bharata, entertained even this wish, viz., that their devotion to
preceptors should be as great as that of Utanka. Gautama's gratification
with and affection for Utanka, among his numerous disciples, were very
great, O Janamejaya. Indeed, Gautama was highly pleased with the
self-restraint and purity of behaviour that characterised Utanka, and
with his acts of prowess and the services he rendered to him. One after
another, thousands of disciples received the preceptor's permission to
return home (after the completion of their pupilage). In consequence,
however, of his great affection for Utanka, Gautama could not permit him
to leave his retreat. Gradually, in course of time, O son, decrepitude
overtook Utanka, that great ascetic. The ascetic, however, in consequence
of his devotion to his preceptor, was not conscious of it. One day, he
set out, O monarch, for fetching fuel for his preceptor. Soon after
Utanka brought a heavy load of fuel. Toil-worn and hungry and afflicted
by the load he bore on his head, O chastiser of foes, he threw the load
down on the Earth, O king. One of his matted locks, white as silver, had
become entangled with the load. Accordingly, when the load was thrown
down, with it fell on the earth that matted lock of hair. Oppressed as he
had been by that load and overcome by hunger, O Bharata, Utanka,
beholding that sign of old age, began to indulge in loud lamentations
from excess of sorrow. Conversant with every duty, the daughter of his
preceptor the, who was possessed of eyes that resembled the petals of the
lotus, and of hips that were full and round, at the command of her sire,
sought, with downcast face, to hold Utanka's tears in her hands. Her
hands seemed to burn with those tear-drops that she held. Unable,
accordingly, to hold them longer, she was obliged to throw them down on
the Earth. The Earth herself was unable to hold those tear-drops of
Utanka. With a gratified heart, Gautama then said unto the regenerate
Utanka,--Why, O son, is thy mind so afflicted with grief today? Tell me
calmly and quietly, O learned Rishi, for I wish to hear it in detail.'
"Utanka said, 'With mind entirely devoted to thee, and wholly bent upon
doing what is agreeable to thee, with my, heart's devotion turned to
thee, and with thoughts entirely dwelling on thee, (I have resided here
till) decrepitude has come upon me without my knowing it at all. I have
not, again, known any happiness. Though I have dwelt with thee for a
hundred years, yet thou hast not granted me permission to depart. Many
disciples of thine, that were my juniors, have, however, been permitted
by thee to return. Indeed, hundreds and thousands of foremost Brahmanas
have, equipt with knowledge, been permitted by thee (to depart from thy
retreat and set themselves up as teachers)!'
"Gautama said, 'Through my love and affection for thee, and in
consequence of thy dutiful services to me, a long time has elapsed
without my knowing it, O foremost of Brahmanas. If, however, O thou of
Bhrigu's race, the desire is entertained by thee of leaving this place,
do thou go without delay, receiving my permission.'
"Utanka said. 'What shall I present to my preceptor? Tell me this, O best
of regenerate persons. Having brought it, I shall go hence, O lord, with
thy permission.'
"Gautama said. 'The good that the gratification of the preceptor is the
final fee.[171] Without doubt, O regenerate one. I have been highly
gratified with thy conduct. Know, O perpetuator of Bhrigu's race, that I
have been exceedingly gratified with thee for this. If thou becomest a
young man today of sixteen years, I shall bestow on thee, O regenerate
one, this my own daughter for becoming thy wife. No other woman save this
one is capable of waiting upon thy energy.' At these words of Gautama,
Utanka once again became a youth and accepted that famous maiden for his
wife. Receiving the permission of his preceptor, he then addressed his
preceptor's wife, saying,--'What shall I give thee as final fee for my
preceptor? Do thou command me. I desire to accomplish, with wealth or
even my life, what is agreeable and beneficial to thee. Whatever gem,
exceedingly wonderful and of great value, exists in this world, I shall
bring for thee with the aid of my penances. I have no doubt in this.'
"Ahalya said, 'I am highly gratified with thee, O learned Brahmana, with
thy unintermitting devotion, O sinless one. This is enough. Blessed be
thou, go whithersoever thou likest.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Utanka, however, O monarch, once more, said
these words,--Do thou command me, O mother. It is meet that I should do
something that is agreeable to thee.'
"Ahalya said, 'Blessed be thou, bring for me those celestial ear-rings
that are worn by the wife of Saudasa. That which is due to thy preceptor
will then be well-discharged.' Replying unto her 'So be it,'--Utanka
departed, O Janamejaya, resolved to bring those ear-rings for doing what
was agreeable to his preceptor's wife. That foremost of Brahmanas,
Utanka, proceeded without any loss of time to Saudasa who had (through
the curse of Vasishtha) become a cannibal, in order to solicit the
ear-rings from him. Gautama meanwhile said unto his wife,--'Utanka is not
to be seen today.' Thus addressed, she informed him how he had departed
for fetching the jewelled ear-rings (of Saudasa's queen). At this,
Gautama said,--'Thou hast not acted wisely. Cursed (by Vasishtha), that
king (who has been transformed into a man-eater) will verily slay Utanka.'
"Ahalya said, 'Without knowing this, O holy one, I have set Utanka to
this task. He shall not, however, incur any danger through thy grace.
Thus addressed by her, Gautama said,--'Let it be so!' Meanwhile, Utanka
met king Saudasa in a deserted forest.'"
