SECTION LXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by Krishna, Yudhishthira, the son of
Dharma, endued with great intelligence, saluted Vyasa and said these
words: 'Do thou cause me to be initiated when the proper hour, as thou
truly knowest, comes for that rite. This my sacrifice is entirely
dependent on thee.'
"Vyasa said, 'Myself, O son of Kunti, and Paila and Yajnavalkya, shall
without doubt, achieve every rite at the proper time. The rite of
initiating thee will be performed on the day of full moon belonging to
the month of Chaitra. Let all the necessaries of the sacrifice, O
foremost of men, be got ready. Let Sutas well-versed in the science of
horses, and let Brahmanas also possessed of the same lore, select, after
examination, a worthy horse in order that thy sacrifice maybe completed.
Loosening the animal according to the injunctions of the scriptures, let
him wander over the whole Earth with her belt of seas, displaying thy
blazing glory, O king!'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed (by the Rishi), Yudhishthira,
the son of Pandu, that lord of Earth, answered,--'So be it!'--and then, O
monarch, he accomplished all that that utterer of Brahma had directed.
All the articles necessary for the sacrifice, O king, were duly procured.
The royal son of Dharma, possessed of immeasurable soul, having procured
all the necessaries, informed the Island-born Krishna of it. Then Vyasa
of great energy said unto the royal son of Dharma,--'As regards
ourselves, we are all prepared to initiate thee in view of the sacrifice.
Let the Sphya and the Kurcha and all the other articles that, O thou of
Kuru's race, may be needed for thy sacrifice, be made of gold.[189] Let
the horse also be loosened today, for roaming on the Earth, agreeably to
the ordinances of the scriptures. Let the animal, duly protected, wander
over the Earth.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Let arrangements be made by thee, O regenerate one,
about loosening this horse for enabling it to wander over the Earth at
its will. It behoveth thee, O ascetic, to say who will protect this steed
while roaming over the Earth freely according to its will.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed (by king Yudhishthira), O
monarch, the Island-born Krishna said,--'He who is born after Bhimasena,
who is the foremost of all bowmen, who is called Jishnu, who is endued
with great patience and capable of overcoming all resistance,--he will
protect the horse. That destroyer of the Nivatakavachas is competent to
conquer the whole Earth. In him are all celestial weapons. His body is
like that of a celestial in its powers of endurance. His bow and quivers
are celestial. Even he will follow this horse.--He is well versed in both
Religion and wealth. He is a master of all the sciences. O foremost of
kings, he will agreeably to the scriptures, cause the steed to roam and
graze at its will. This mighty-armed prince, of dark complexion, is
endued with eyes resembling the petals of the lotus. That hero, the
father of Abhimanyu, will protect the steed. Bhimasena also is endued
with great energy. The son of Kunti is possessed of immeasurable might.
He is competent to protect the kingdom, aided by Nakula, O monarch.
Possessed of great intelligence and fame, Sahadeva will, O thou of Kuru's
race, duly attend to all the relatives that have been invited to thy
capital.' Thus addressed by the Rishi, that perpetuator of Kuru's race,
viz., Yudhishthira, accomplished every injunction duly and appointed
Phalguna to attend to the horse.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Come, O Arjuna, let the horse, O hero, be protected
by thee. Thou alone art competent to protect it, and none else. Those
kings, O mighty-armed hero, who will come forward to encounter thee, try,
O sinless one, to avoid battles with them to the best of thy power. Thou
shouldst also invite them all to this sacrifice of mine. Indeed, O
mighty-armed one go forth but try to establish friendly relations with
them.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The righteous-souled king Yudhishthira, having
said so unto his brother Savyasachin, commanded Bhima and Nakula to
protect the city. With the permission of king Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthira
then set Sahadeva, that foremost of warriors, to wait upon all the
invited guests.'"
