SECTION XL
"Brahmana said, 'From the unmanifest first sprang Mahat (the Great Soul)
endued with great intelligence, the source of all the qualities. That is
said to be the first creation. The Great Soul is signified by these
synonymous words--the Great Soul, Intelligence, Vishnu, Jishnu, Sambhu of
great valour, the Understanding, the means of acquiring knowledge, the
means of perception, as also fame, courage, and memory. Knowing this, a
learned Brahmana has never to encounter delusion. It has hands and feet
on every side, it has ears on every side. It stands, pervading everything
in the universe. Of great power, that Being is stationed in the heart of
all. Minuteness, Lightness and Affluence, are his. He is the lord of all,
and identical with effulgence, and knows not decay. In Him are all those
who comprehend the nature of the understanding, all those who are devoted
to goodness of disposition, all those who practise meditation, who are
always devoted to Yoga, who are firm in truth, who have subdued their
senses, who are possessed of knowledge, who are freed from cupidity, who
have conquered wrath, who are of cheerful hearts, who are endued with
wisdom, who are liberated from ideas of meum (and teum), and who are
devoid of egoism. All these, freed from every kind of attachment, attain
to the status of Greatness. That person who understands that holy and
high goal, viz., the Great Soul, becomes freed from delusion. The
self-born Vishnu becomes the Lord in the primary creations. He who thus
knows the Lord lying in the cave, the Supreme, Ancient Being, of
universal form, the golden one, the highest goal of all persons endued
with understanding,--that intelligent man lives, transcending the
understanding.'"
