SECTION XXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'When night came, all those persons, having finished
their evening rites, approached Vyasa. Dhritarashtra of righteous soul,
with purified body and with mind solely directed towards it, sat there
with the Pandavas and the Rishis in his company. The ladies of the royal
household sat with Gandhari in a secluded spot. All the citizens and the
inhabitants of the provinces ranged themselves according to their years.
Then the great ascetic, Vyasa, of mighty energy, bathing in the sacred
waters of the Bhagirathi, summoned all the deceased warriors, viz., those
that had fought on the side of the Pandavas, those that had fought for
the Kauravas, including highly blessed kings belonging to diverse realms.
At this, O Janamejaya, a deafening uproar was heard to arise from within
the waters, resembling that which had formerly been heard of the forces
of the Kurus and the Pandavas. Then those kings, headed by Bhishma and
Drona, with all their troops, arose by thousands from the waters of the
Bhagirathi. There were Virata and Drupada, with their sons and forces.
There were the sons of Draupadi and the son of Subhadra, and the Rakshasa
Ghatotkacha. There were Karna and Duryodhana, and the mighty car-warrior
Sakuni, and the other children, endued with great strength, of
Dhritarashtra, headed by Dussasana. There were the son of Jarasandha, and
Bhagadatta, and Jalasandha of great energy, and Bhurisravas, and Sala,
and Salya, and Vrishasena with his younger brother. There were prince
Lakshmana (the son of Duryodhana), and the son of Dhrishtadyumna, and all
the children of Sikhandin, and Dhrishtaketu, with his younger brother.
There were Achala and Vrishaka, and the Rakshasa Alayudha, and Valhika,
and Somadatta, and king Chekitana. These and many others, who for their
number cannot be conveniently named, appeared on that occasion. All of
them rose from the waters of the Bhagirathi, with resplendent bodies.
Those kings appeared, each clad in that dress and equipt with that
standard and that vehicle which he had while fighting on the field. All
of them were now robed in celestial vestments and all had brilliant
ear-rings. They were free from all animosity and pride, and divested of
wrath and jealousy. Gandharvas sang their praises, and bards waited on
them, chanting their deeds. Robed in celestial vestments and wearing
celestial garlands, each of them was waited upon by bands of Apsaras. At
that time, through the puissance of his penances, the great ascetic, the
son of Satyavati, gratified with Dhritarashtra, gave him celestial
vision. Endued with celestial knowledge and strength, Gandhari of great
fame saw all her children as also all that had been slain in battle. All
persons assembled there beheld with steadfast gaze and hearts filled with
wonder that amazing and inconceivable phenomenon which made the hair on
their bodies stand on its end. It looked like a high carnival of
gladdened men and women. That wondrous scene looked like a picture
painted on the canvas. Dhritarashtra, beholding all those heroes, with
his celestial vision obtained through the grace of that sage, became full
of joy, O chief of Bharata's race."'
