SECTION VI
"Dhritarashtra said, Thou shouldst always ascertain the Mandalas that
belong to thee, to thy foes, to neutrals, and to those that are disposed
equally towards thee and thy foes, O Bharata.[12] The Mandalas also of
the four kinds of foes, of these called Atatayins, and of allies, and the
allies of foes, should be distinguished by thee, O crusher of foes.[13]
The ministers of state, the people of the provinces, the garrisons of
forts, and the forces, O foremost one of Kuru's race, may or may not be
tampered with. (Thou shouldst, therefore, behave in such a manner that
these may not be tampered with by thy foes). The twelve (enumerated
above), O son of Kunti, constitute the principal concerns of kings. These
twelve, as also sixty, having Ministers for their foremost, should be
looked after by the king.[14] Professors conversant with the science of
politics call these by the name of Mandala. Understand, O Yudhishthira,
that the six incidents (of peace, war, march, halt, sowing dissensions,
and conciliation) depend upon these. Growth and diminution should also be
understood, as also the condition of being stationary. The attributes of
the sixfold incidents, O thou of mighty arms, as resting on the two and
seventy (already enumerated), should also be carefully understood. When
one's own side has become strong and the side of the foe his become weak,
it is then, O son of Kunti, that the king should war against the foe and
strive to will victory. When the enemy is strong and one's own side is
weak, then the weak king, if possessed of intelligence, should seek to
make peace with the enemy. The king should collect a large store of
articles (for his commissariat). When able to march out, he should on no
account make a delay, O Bharata. Besides, he should on that occasion set
his men to offices for which they are fit, without being moved by any
other consideration. (When obliged to yield a portion of his territories)
he should give his foe only such land as does not produce crops in
abundance. (When obliged to give wealth), he should give gold containing
much base metal. (When obliged to give a portion of his forces), he
should give such men as are not noted for strength. One that is skilled
in treaties should, when taking land or gold or men from the foe, take
what is possessed of attributes the reverse of this.[15] In making
treaties of peace, the son of the (defeated) king, should be demanded as
a hostage, O chief of the Bharatas. A contrary course of conduct would
not be beneficial, O son. If a calamity comes over the king, he should,
with knowledge of means-and counsels, strive to emancipate himself from
it.[16] The king, O foremost of monarchs, should maintain the cheerless
and the destitute (such as the blind, the deaf and dumb, and the
diseased) among his people. Himself protecting his own kingdom, the king,
possessed of great might, should direct all his efforts, either one after
another or simultaneously, against his foes. He should afflict and
obstruct them and seek to drain their treasury. The king that desires his
own growth should never injure the subordinate chieftains that are under
his sway. O son of Kunti, thou shouldst never seek to war with that king
who desires to conquer the whole Earth. Thou shouldst seek to gain
advantages by producing, with the aid of thy ministers, dissensions among
his aristocracy and subordinate chieftains. A powerful king should never
seek to exterminate weak kings, for these do good to the world by
cherishing the good and punishing the wicked. O foremost of kings, thou
shouldst live, adopting the behaviour of the cane.[17] If a strong king
advances against a weak one, the latter should make him desist, by
adopting conciliation and other modes. If unable to stop the invader in
this way, then he, as also those that are disposed to do him good, should
fall upon the foe for battling with him. Indeed, with his ministers and
treasury and citizens, he should thus adopt force against the invader. If
battling with the foe becomes hopeless, then he should fall, sacrificing
his resources one after another. Casting off his life in this way, he
will attain to liberation from all sorrow.'"
