
SECTION CCXVI
(Arjuna-vanavasa Parva continued)
"Vaisampayana said, 'When that spreader of the renown of Kuru's race, the
strong-armed Arjuna, set out (for the forest), Brahmanas conversant with
the Vedas walked behind that illustrious hero to a certain distance.
Followed by Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas and their branches and
devoted to the contemplation of the Supreme Spirit, by persons skilled in
music, by ascetics devoted to the Deity, by reciters of Puranas, by
narrators of sacred stories by devotees leading celibate lives, by
Vanaprasthas, by Brahmanas sweetly reciting celestial histories, and by
various other classes of persons of sweet speeches, Arjuna journeyed like
Indra followed by the Maruts. And, O thou of Bharata's race, that bull
among the Bharatas saw, as he journeyed, many delightful and picturesque
forests, lakes, rivers, seas, provinces, and waters. At length, on
arriving at the source of the Ganges the mighty hero thought of settling
there.
"Listen now, O Janamejaya, to a wonderful feat which that foremost of the
sons of Pandu, of high soul, did, while living there. When that son of
Kunti, O Bharata, and the Brahmanas who had followed him, took up their
residence in that region, the latter performed innumerable Agnihotras
(sacrificial rites by igniting the sacred fire). And, O king, in
consequence of those learned vow-observing, and illustrious Brahmanas,
who never deviated from the right path, daily establishing and igniting
with mantras on the banks of that sacred stream, after the performance of
their ablutions, fires for their sacrifices, and pouring libations of
clarified butter into the same, and worshipping those fires with
offerings of flowers, that region itself where the Ganges entered the
plains became exceedingly beautiful. One day that bull amongst the
Pandavas, while residing in that region in the midst of those Brahmanas,
descended (as usual) into the Ganges to perform his ablutions. After his
ablutions had been over, and after he had offered oblations of water unto
his deceased ancestors, he was about to get up from the stream to perform
his sacrificial rites before the fire, when the mighty-armed hero, O
king, was dragged into the bottom of the water by Ulupi, the daughter of
the king of the Nagas, urged by the god of desire. And it so happened
that the son of Pandu was carried into the beautiful mansion of Kauravya,
the king of the Nagas. Arjuna saw there a sacrificial fire ignited for
himself. Beholding that fire, Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti performed his
sacrificial rites with devotion. And Agni was much gratified with Arjuna
for the fearlessness with which that hero had poured libations into his
manifest form. After he had thus performed his rites before the fire, the
son of Kunti, beholding the daughter of the king of the Nagas, addressed
her smilingly and said, 'O handsome girl, what an act of rashness hast
thou done. O timid one! Whose is this beautiful region, who art thou and
whose daughter?'
"Hearing these words of Arjuna, Ulupi answered, 'There is a Naga of the
name of Kauravya, born in the line of Airavata. I am, O prince, the
daughter of that Kauravya, and my name is Ulupi. O tiger among men,
beholding thee descend into the stream to perform thy ablutions, I was
deprived of reason by the god of desire. O sinless one, I am still
unmarried. Afflicted as I am by the god of desire on account of thee, O
thou of Kuru's race, gratify me today by giving thyself up to me.'
"Arjuna replied, 'Commanded by king Yudhishthira, O amiable one, I am
undergoing the vow of Brahmacharin for twelve years. I am not free to act
in any way I like. But, O ranger of the waters, I am still willing to do
thy pleasure (if I can). I have never spoken an untruth in my life. Tell
me, therefore, O Naga maid, how I may act so that, while doing thy
pleasure, I may not be guilty of any untruth or breach of duty.'
"Ulupi answered, 'I know, O son of Pandu, why thou wanderest over the
earth, and why thou hast been commanded to lead the life of a
Brahmacharin by the superior. Even this was the understanding to which
all of you had been pledged, viz., that amongst you all owning Drupada's
daughter as your common wife, he who would from ignorance enter the room
where one of you would be sitting with her, should lead the life of a
Brahmacharin in the woods for twelve years. The exile of any one amongst
you, therefore, is only for the sake of Draupadi. Thou art but observing
the duty arising from that vow. Thy virtue cannot sustain any diminution
(by acceding to my solicitation). Then again, O thou of large eyes, it is
a duty to relieve the distressed. Thy virtue suffereth no diminution by
relieving me. Oh, if (by this act), O Arjuna, thy virtue doth suffer a
small diminution, thou wilt acquire great merit by saving my life. Know
me for thy worshipper, O Partha! Therefore, yield thyself up to me! Even
this, O lord, is the opinion of the wise (viz., that one should accept a
woman that wooeth). If thou do not act in this way, know that I will
destroy myself. O thou of mighty arms, earn great merit by saving my
life. I seek thy shelter, O best of men! Thou protectest always, O son of
Kunti, the afflicted and the masterless. I seek thy protection, weeping
in sorrow. I woo thee, being filled with desire. Therefore, do what is
agreeable to me. It behoveth thee to gratify my wish by yielding thy self
up to me.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by the daughter of the king of the
Nagas, the son of Kunti did everything she desired, making virtue his
motive. The mighty Arjuna, spending the night in the mansion of the Naga
rose with the sun in the morning. Accompanied by Ulupi he came back from
the palace of Kauravya to the region where the Ganges entereth the
plains. The chaste Ulupi, taking her leave there, returned to her own
abode. And, O Bharata, she granted unto Arjuna a boon making him
invincible in water, saying, 'Every amphibious creature shall, without
doubt, be vanquishable by thee.'"
(Arjuna-vanavasa Parva continued)
(Arjuna-vanavasa Parva continued)
(Arjuna-vanavasa Parva continued)
(Arjuna-vanavasa Parva continued)
