
SECTION CCXV
(Arjuna-vanavasa Parva)
"Vaisampayana said, 'The Pandavas, having established such a rule,
continued to reside there. By the prowess of their arms they brought many
kings under their sway. And Krishna became obedient unto all the five
sons of Pritha, those lions among men, of immeasurable energy. Like the
river Saraswati decked with elephants, which again take pleasure in that
stream, Draupadi took great delight in her five heroic husbands and they
too took delight in her. And in consequence of the illustrious Pandavas
being exceedingly virtuous in their practice, the whole race of Kurus,
free from sin, and happy, grew in prosperity.
"After some time, O king, it so happened that certain robbers lifted the
cattle of a Brahmana, and while they were carrying away the booty, the
Brahmana, deprived of his senses by anger, repaired to Khandavaprastha,
and began to reprove the Pandavas in accents of woe. The Brahmana said,
'Ye Pandavas, from this your dominion, my kine are even now being taken
away by force by despicable and wicked wretches! Pursue ye the thieves.
Alas, the sacrificial butter of a peaceful Brahmana is being taken away
by crows! Alas, the wretched jackal invadeth the empty cave of a lion! A
king that taketh the sixth part of the produce of the land without
protecting the subject, hath been called by the wise to be the most
sinful person in the whole world. The wealth of a Brahmana is being taken
away by robbers! Virtue itself is sustaining a diminution! Take me up by
the hand, ye Pandavas for I am plunged in grief!"
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, heard those
accents of the Brahmana weeping in bitter grief. As soon as he heard
those accents, he loudly assured the Brahmana, saying, 'No fear!' But it
so happened that the chamber where the illustrious Pandavas had their
weapons was then occupied by Yudhishthira the just with Krishna. Arjuna,
therefore, was incapable of entering it or, going alone with the
Brahmana, though repeatedly urged (to do either) by the weeping accents
of the Brahmana. Summoned by the Brahmana, Arjuna reflected, with a
sorrowful heart, Alas, this innocent Brahmana's wealth is being robbed! I
should certainly dry up his tears. He hath come to our gate, and is
weeping even now. If I do not protect him, the king will be touched with
sin in consequence of my indifference; our own irreligiousness will be
cited throughout the kingdom, and we shall incur a great sin. If,
disregarding the king, I enter the chamber, without doubt I shall be
behaving untruthfully towards the monarch without a foe. By entering the
chamber, again, I incur the penalty of an exile in the woods. But I must
overlook everything. I care not if I have to incur sin by disregarding
the king. I care not if I have to go to the woods and die there. Virtue
is superior to the body and lasteth after the body hath perished!'
Dhananjaya, arriving at this resolution, entered the chamber and talked
with Yudhishthira. Coming out with the bow, he cheerfully told the
Brahmana, 'Proceed, O Brahmana, with haste, so that those wretched
robbers may not go much ahead of us. I shall accompany thee and restore
unto thee thy wealth that hath fallen into the hands of the thieves.'
Then Dhananjaya, capable of using both his arms with equal skill, armed
with the bow and cased in mail and riding in his war-chariot decked with
a standard, pursued the thieves, and piercing them with his arrows,
compelled them to give up the booty. Benefiting the Brahmana thus by
making over to him his kine, and winning great renown, the hero returned
to the capital. Bowing unto all the elders, and congratulated by
everybody, Partha at last approached Yudhishthira, and addressing him,
said, 'Give me leave, O lord, to observe the vow I took. In beholding
thee sitting with Draupadi, I have violated the rule established by
ourselves. I shall therefore go into the woods, for this is even our
understanding.' Then Yudhishthira, suddenly hearing those painful words,
became afflicted with grief, and said in an agitated voice, 'Why!' A
little while after, king Yudhishthira in grief said unto his brother
Dhananjaya of curly hair who never departed from his vows, these words,
'O sinless one, if I am an authority worthy of regard, listen to what I
say. O hero, full well do I know the reason why thou hadst entered my
chamber and didst what thou regardest to be an act disagreeable to me.
But there is no displeasure in my mind. The younger brother may, without
fault, enter the chamber where the elder brother sitteth with his wife.
It is only the elder brother that acts against the rules of propriety by
entering the room where the younger brother sitteth with his wife.
Therefore, O thou of mighty arms, desist from thy purpose. Do what I say.
Thy virtue hath sustained no diminution. Thou hast not disregarded me.'
"Arjuna, hearing this, replied, 'I have heard, even from thee, that
quibbling is not permitted in the discharge of duty. I cannot waver from
truth. Truth is my weapon.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Obtaining then the king's permission, Arjuna
prepared himself for a forest-life; and he went to the forest to live
there for twelve years.'"
