
SECTION CCXII
'Narada continued, 'As soon as those festivities came to an end, the
brothers Sunda and Upasunda, desirous of the Sovereignty of the three
worlds, took counsel and commanded their forces to be arranged. Obtaining
the assent of their friends and relatives, of the elders of the Daitya
race and of their ministers of state, and performing the preliminary
rites of departure, they set out in the night when the constellation
Magha was in the ascendant. The brothers set out with a large Daitya
force clad in mail and armed with maces and axes and lances and clubs.
The Daitya heroes set out on their expedition with joyous hearts, the
charanas (bards) chanting auspicious panegyrics indicative of their
future triumphs. Furious in war, the Daitya brothers, capable of going
everywhere at will, ascended the skies and went to the region of the
celestials. The celestials knowing they were coming and acquainted also
with the boons granted unto them by the Supreme Deity left heaven and
sought refuge in the region of Brahman. Endued with fierce prowess, the
Daitya heroes soon subjugated the region of Indra, and vanquishing the
diverse tribes of Yakshas and Rakshasas and every creature ranging the
skies, came away. Those mighty car-warriors next subjugated the Nagas of
the nether region, and then the inmates of the ocean and then all the
tribes of the Mlechchhas. Desirous next of subjugating the whole earth,
those heroes of irresistible sway, summoning their soldiers, issued these
cruel commands, 'Brahmanas and royal sages (on earth) with their
libations and other food offered at grand sacrifices, increase the energy
and strength of the gods, as also their prosperity. Engaged in such acts,
they are the enemies of the Asuras. All of us, therefore, mustering
together should completely slaughter them off the face of the earth!'
Ordering their soldiers thus on the eastern shore of the great ocean, and
entertaining such a cruel resolution, the Asura brothers set out in all
directions. And those that were performing sacrifices and the Brahmanas
that were assisting at those sacrifices, the mighty brothers instantly
slew. And slaughtering them with violence they departed for some other
place. Whilst their soldiers threw into the water the sacrificial fires
that were in the asylums of Munis with souls under complete control, the
curses uttered by the illustrious Rishis in wrath, rendered abortive by
the boons granted (by Brahman), affected not the Asura brothers. When the
Brahmanas saw that their curses produced not the slightest effect like
shafts shot at stones they fled in all directions, forsaking their rites
and vows. Even those Rishis on earth that were crowned with ascetic
success, and had their passions under complete control and were wholly
engrossed in meditation of the Deity, from fear of the Asura brothers,
fled like snakes at the approach of Vinata's son (Garuda the
snake-eater). The sacred asylums were all trodden down and broken. The
sacrificial jars and vessels being broken, their (sacred) contents were
scattered over the ground. The whole universe became empty, as if its
creatures had all been stricken down during the season of general
dissolution. And, O king, after the Rishis had all disappeared and made
themselves invisible both the great Asuras, resolved upon their
destruction, began to assume various forms. Assuming the forms of
maddened elephants with temples rent from excess of juice, the Asura
pair, searching out the Rishis who had sheltered themselves in caves,
sent them to the region of Yama. Sometimes becoming as lions and again as
tigers and disappearing the next moment, by these and other methods the
cruel couple, seeing the Rishis, slew them instantly. Sacrifice and study
ceased, and kings and Brahmanas were exterminated. The earth became
utterly destitute of sacrifices and festivals. And the terrified people
uttered cries of Oh and Alas and all buying and selling were stopped. All
religious rites ceased, and the earth became destitute of sacred
ceremonies and marriages. Agriculture was neglected and cattle were no
longer tended. Towns and asylums became desolate. And scattered over with
bones and skeletons, the earth assumed a frightful aspect. All ceremonies
in honour of the Pitris were suspended, and the sacred sound of Vashat
and the whole circle of auspicious rites ceased. The earth became
frightful to behold. The Sun and the Moon, the Planets and Stars, and
Constellations, and the other dwellers in the firmament, witnessing these
acts of Sunda and Upasunda, grieved deeply. Subjugating all the points of
heaven by means of such cruel acts, the Asura brothers took up their
abode in Kurukshetra, without a single rival.'"
