
SECTION XX
"Sauti said, 'Thus have I recited to you the whole story of how Amrita
was churned out of the Ocean, and the occasion on which the horse
Uchchaihsravas of great beauty and incomparable prowess was obtained. It
was this horse about which Kadru asked Vinata, saying, 'Tell me, amiable
sister, without taking much time, of what colour Uchchaishravas is.' And
Vinata answered, 'That prince of steeds is certainly white. What dost
thou think, sister? Say thou what is its colour. Let us lay a wager upon
it.' Kadru replied, then, 'O thou of sweet smiles. I think that horse is
black in its tail. Beauteous one, bet with me that she who loseth will
become the other's slave.'
'Sauti continued, 'Thus wagering with each other about menial service as
a slave, the sisters went home, and resolved to satisfy themselves by
examining the horse next day. And Kadru, bent upon practising a
deception, ordered her thousand sons to transform themselves into black
hair and speedily cover the horse's tail in order that she might not
become a slave. But her sons, the snakes, refusing to do her bidding, she
cursed them, saying, 'During the snake-sacrifice of the wise king
Janamejaya of the Pandava race, Agni shall consume you all.' And the
Grandsire (Brahman) himself heard this exceedingly cruel curse pronounced
by Kadru, impelled by the fates. And seeing that the snakes had
multiplied exceedingly, the Grandsire, moved by kind consideration for
his creatures, sanctioned with all the gods this curse of Kadru. Indeed,
as the snakes were of virulent poison, great prowess and excess of
strength, and ever bent on biting other creatures, their mother's conduct
towards them--those persecutors of all creatures,--was very proper for
the good of all creatures. Fate always inflicts punishment of death on
those who seek the death of other creatures. The gods, having exchanged
such sentiments with one another, supported Kadru's action (and went
away). And Brahman, calling Kasyapa to him, spake unto him these words,
'O thou pure one who overcomest all enemies, these snakes begotten by
you, who are of virulent poison and huge bodies, and ever intent on
biting other creatures, have been cursed by their mother. O son, do not
grieve for it in the least. The destruction of the snakes in the
sacrifice hath, indeed, been ordained long ago' Saying this, the divine
Creator of the Universe comforted Kasyapa and imparted to that
illustrious one the knowledge of neutralising poison."
And so ends the twentieth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
