SECTION XXXV
"Vaisampayana said, 'King Dhritarashtra had never beheld his own sons.
Obtaining eye-sight through the grace of the Rishi, he beheld, for the
first time, O perpetuator of Kuru's race, those children of his that were
very like his own self. That foremost of men, viz., the Kuru monarch, had
learnt all the duties of kings, as also the Vedas and the Upanishadas,
and had acquired certitude of understanding (from the same source).
Vidura of great wisdom attained to high success through the power of his
penances. Dhritarashtra also attained to great success in consequence of
having met the ascetic Vyasa.'
"Janamejaya said, 'If Vyasa, disposed to grant me a boon, kindly show me
my sire in that form which he had, clad as he used to be clad, and as old
as he was when he departed from this world, I may then believe all that
thou hast told me. Such a sight will be most agreeable to me. Indeed, I
shall regard myself crowned with success. I shall have gained a certainty
of conclusion. O, let my wish be crowned with fruition through the grace
of that foremost of Rishis.'
"Sauti said,--'After king Janamejaya had said these words, Vyasa of great
energy and intelligence showed his grace and brought Parikshit (from the
other world). King Janamejaya beheld his royal father, possessed of great
beauty, brought down from Heaven, in the same form that he had and of the
same age as he was (at the time of leaving this world). The high-souled
Samika also, and his son Sringin, were similarly brought there. All the
counsellors and ministers of the king beheld them. King Janamejaya.
performing the final bath in his sacrifice, became highly glad. He poured
the sacred water on his father, even as he caused it to be poured on
himself. Having undergone the final bath, the king addressed the
regenerate Astika who had sprung from the race of the Yayavaras and who
was the son of Jaratkaru, and said these words,--'O Astika, this
sacrifice of mine is fraught with many wonderful incidents, since this my
sire has been seen by me--he who has dispelled all my sorrows.'
"Astika said, 'The performer of that sacrifice in which the ancient
Rishi, the Island-born Vyasa, that vast receptacle of penances, is
present, is sure, O foremost one of Kuru's race, to conquer both the
worlds. O son of the Pandavas, thou hast heard a wonderful history. The
snakes have been consumed into ashes and have followed the footsteps of
thy sire. Through thy truthfulness, O monarch, Takshaka has with
difficulty escaped a painful fate. The Rishis have all been worshipped.
Thou hast seen also the end that has been attained by thy high-souled
sire. Having heard this sin-cleansing history thou hast achieved abundant
merit. The knots of thy heart have been untied through sight of this
foremost of person. They that are the supporters of the wings of
Righteousness, they that are of good conduct and excellent disposition,
they at sight of whom sins become attenuated,--we should all bow to them.'
"Sauti continued, 'Having heard this from that foremost of regenerate
ones, King Janamejaya worshipped that Rishi, repeatedly honouring him in
every way. Conversant with all duties he then asked the Rishi
Vaisampayana of unfading glory about the sequel, O best of ascetics, of
king Dhritarashtra's residence in the woods.'"
