
SECTION CCXXIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Vibhatsu, the son of Pandu, invoking his
excellent weapons, prevented that shower of rain by Indra, by means of a
shower of his own weapons. And Arjuna of immeasurable soul soon covered
the forest of Khandava with innumerable arrows like the moon covering the
atmosphere with a thick fog. When the sky above that forest was thus
covered with the arrows of Arjuna no living creature could then escape
from below. And it so happened that while that forest was burning,
Takshaka, the chief of the Nagas, was not there, having gone at that time
to the field of Kurukshetra. But Aswasena, the mighty son of Takshaka,
was there. He made great efforts to escape from that fire; but confined
by Arjuna's shafts he succeeded not in finding a way. It was then that
his mother, the daughter of a snake, determined to save him by swallowing
him first. His mother first swallowed his head and then was swallowing
his tail. And desirous of saving her son, the sea-snake rose (up from the
earth) while still employed in swallowing her son's tail. But Arjuna as
soon as he beheld her escaping, severed her head from her body by means
of a sharp and keen-edged arrow. Indra saw all this, and desiring to save
his friend's son, the wielder of the thunderbolt, by raising a violent
wind, deprived Arjuna of consciousness. During those few moments,
Aswasena succeeded in effecting his escape. Beholding that manifestation
of the power of illusion, and deceived by that snake, Arjuna was much
enraged. He forthwith cut every animal seeking to escape by the skies,
into two, three, or more pieces. And Vibhatsu in anger, and Agni, and
Vasudeva also, cursed the snake that had escaped so deceitfully, saying,
'Never shalt thou be famous!' And Jishnu remembering the deception
practised upon him, became angry, and covering the firmament with a cloud
of arrows, sought to fight with him of a thousand eyes. The chief of the
celestials also, seeing Arjuna in anger, sought to fight with him, and
hurled his own fierce weapons, covering the wide expanse of the
firmament. Then the winds, making a loud roar and agitating all the
oceans, brought together masses of clouds in the sky, charged with
torrents of rain. Those masses of clouds began to vomit thunder and
terrible flashes of lightning charged with the thunderclap. Then Arjuna
possessing a knowledge of means, hurled the excellent weapon called
Vayavya with proper mantras to dispel those clouds. With that weapon the
energy and force of Indra's thunderbolt and of those clouds were
destroyed. And the torrents of rain with which those clouds were charged
were all dried up, and the lightning that played amongst them was also
destroyed. Within a moment the sky was cleared of dust and darkness, and
a delicious, cool breeze began to blow and the disc of the sun resumed
its normal state. Then the eater of clarified butter (Agni), glad because
none could baffle him, assumed various forms, and sprinkled over with the
fat exuded by the bodies of creatures, blazed forth with all his flames,
filling the universe with his roar. Then numerous birds of the Garuda
tribe bearing excellent feathers, beholding that the forest was protected
by Krishna and Arjuna, descended filled with pride, from the upper skies,
desirous of striking those heroes with their thunderlike wings, beaks and
claws. Innumerable Nagas also, with faces emitting fire descending from
high, approached Arjuna, vomiting the most virulent poison all the while.
Beholding them approach, Arjuna cut them into pieces by means of arrows
steeped in the fire of his own wrath. Then those birds and snakes,
deprived of life, fell into the burning element below. And there came
also, desirous of battle, innumerable Asuras with Gandharvas and Yakshas
and Rakshasas and Nagas sending forth terrific yells. Armed with machines
vomiting from their throats (mouths?) iron balls and bullets, and
catapults for propelling huge stones, and rockets, they approached to
strike Krishna and Partha, their energy and strength increased by wrath.
But though they rained a perfect shower of weapons, Vibhatsu, addressing
them reproachfully, struck off their heads with his own sharp arrows.
That slayer of foes, Krishna, also, endued with great energy, made a
great slaughter of the Daitya and the Danava with his discus. Many Asuras
of immeasurable might, pierced with Krishna's arrows and smitten with the
force of his discus, became motionless like waifs and strays stranded on
the bank by the violence of the waves. Then Sakra the lord of the
celestials, riding on his white elephant, rushed at those heroes, and
taking up his thunderbolt which could never go in vain, hurled it with
great force. And the slayer of Asuras said unto the gods, 'These two are
slain.' Beholding the fierce thunderbolt about to be hurled by their
chief, the celestials all took up their respective weapons. Yama, O king,
took up the death-dealing mace, and Kuvera his spiked club, and Varuna
his noose and beautiful missile. And Skanda (Kartikeya) took up his long
lance and stood motionless like the mountain of Meru. The Aswins stood
there with resplendent plants in their hands. Dhatri stood, bow in hand,
and Jaya with a thick club. Tvashtri of great strength took up in wrath,
a huge mountain and Surya stood with a bright dart, and Mrityu with a
battle-axe. Aryaman stalked about with a terrible bludgeon furnished with
sharp spikes, and Mitra stood there with a discus sharp as a razor. And,
O monarch, Pusha and Bhaga and Savitri, in wrath, rushed at Krishna and
Partha with bows and scimitars in hand. And Rudras and the Vasus, the
mighty Maruts and the Viswedevas and the Sadhyas, all resplendent with
their own energy,--these and many other celestials, armed with various
weapons rushed against those exalted of men, Krishna and Partha, for
smiting them down. Then were seen in that great conflict wonderful
portents all around robbing every creature of his sense, and resembling
those that appeared at the time of the universal dissolution. But Arjuna
and Krishna, fearless and invincible in battle, beholding Sakra and the
other celestials prepared for fight, calmly waited, bows in hands.
Skilled in battle, those heroes in wrath assailed the advancing host of
celestials with their own thunderlike arrows. The celestials repeatedly
routed by Krishna and Arjuna, at last left the field of battle for fear
and sought the protection of Indra. The Munis who were witnessing the
battle from the skies, beholding the celestials defeated by Madhava and
Arjuna, were filled with wonder. Sakra also repeatedly witnessing their
prowess in battle, became exceedingly gratified, and once more rushed to
the assault. The chastiser of Paka then caused a heavy shower of stones,
desiring to ascertain the prowess of Arjuna who was able to draw the bow
even with his left hand. Arjuna, in great wrath, dispelled with his
arrows that thick shower. Then he of a hundred sacrifices beholding that
shower baffled, once more caused a thicker shower of stones. But the son
of the chastiser of Paka (viz., Arjuna) gratified his father by baffling
that shower also with his swift arrows. Then Sakra, desirous of smiting
down the son of Pandu, tore up with his hands a large peak from Mandara,
with tall trees on it, and hurled it against him. But Arjuna divided that
mountain-peak into a thousand pieces by his swift-going and fire-mouthed
arrows. The fragments of that mountain, in falling through the skies,
looked as if the sun and the moon and the planets, displaced from their
positions fell down on earth. That huge peak fell down upon that forest
and by its fall killed numerous living creatures that dwelt in Khandava.'"
