
SECTION CCXXII
(Subhadra-harana Parva continued)
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Dhananjaya, informed of the assent of
Yudhishthira, and ascertaining, O Janamejaya, that the maiden had gone to
the Raivataka hill, obtained the assent of Vasudeva also, after having
settled in consultation with him all that required to be done. Then that
bull of Bharata's race, that foremost of men, with Krishna's assent,
riding in his well-built car of gold equipped with rows of small bells
and with every kind of weapon and the clatter of whose wheels resembled
the roar of the clouds and whose splendour was like unto that of a
blazing fire and which struck terror into the hearts of all foes and unto
which were yoked the steeds Saivya and Sugriva, himself accoutred in mail
and armed with sword and his fingers encased in leathern gloves, set out,
as it were, on a hunting expedition. Meanwhile Subhadra, having paid her
homage unto that prince of hills, Raivataka and having worshipped the
deities and made the Brahmanas utter benedictions upon her, and having
also walked round the hill, was coming towards Dwaravati. The son of
Kunti, afflicted with the shafts of the god of desire, suddenly rushed
towards that Yadava girl of faultless features and forcibly took her into
his car. Having seized that girl of sweet smiles, that tiger among men
proceeded in his car of gold towards his own city (Indraprastha).
Meanwhile, the armed attendants of Subhadra, beholding her thus seized
and taken away, all ran, crying towards the city of Dwaraka. Reaching all
together the Yadava court called by the name of Sudharma, they
represented everything about the prowess of Partha unto the chief officer
of the court. The chief officer of the court, having heard everything
from those messengers, blew his gold-decked trumpet of loud blare,
calling all to arms. Stirred up by that sound, the Bhojas, the Vrishnis,
and the Andhakas began to pour in from all sides. Those that were eating
left their food, and those that were drinking left their drink. Those
tigers among men, those great warriors of the Vrishni and the Andhaka
tribes, took their seats upon their thousand thrones of gold covered with
excellent carpets and variegated with gems and corals and possessed of
the lustre of blazing fire. Indeed they took their seats upon those
thrones, like blazing fires receiving faggots to increase their
splendour. And after they were seated in that court which was like unto a
conclave of the celestials themselves, the chief officer of the court,
assisted by those that stood at his back, spoke of the conduct of Jishnu.
The proud Vrishni heroes, of eyes red with wine, as soon as they heard of
it, rose up from their seats, unable to brook what Arjuna had done. Some
amongst them said, 'Yoke our cars', and some, 'Bring our weapons' and
some said, 'Bring our costly bows and strong coats of mail; and some
loudly called upon their charioteers to harness their cars, and some,
from impatience, themselves yoked their horses decked with gold unto
their cars. And while their cars and armours and standards were being
brought, loud became the uproar of those heroes. Then Valadeva, white and
tall as the peak of Kailasa, decked with garlands of wild flowers and
attired in blue robes, and proud and intoxicated with drink, said these
words:
'Ye senseless men, what are ye doing, when Janardana sitteth silent?
Without knowing what is in his mind, vainly do we roar in wrath! Let the
high-souled Krishna give out what he proposeth. Accomplish promptly what
he desireth to do.' Then all of them, hearing those words of Halayudha
that deserved to be accepted, exclaimed, 'Excellent! Excellent!' They
then all became silent. Silence having been restored by the words of the
intelligent Valadeva, they took their seats once more in that assembly.
Then Rama, that oppressor of foes, spoke unto Vasudeva, saying, 'Why, O
Janardana, sittest thou, gazing silently? O Achyuta, it was for thy sake
that the son of Pritha had been welcomed and honoured by us. It seemeth,
however, that that vile wretch deserved not our homage. What man is there
born of a respectable family that would break the plate after having
dined from it! Even if one desireth to make such an alliance, yet
remembering all the services he hath received, who is there, desirous of
happiness, that acts so rashly? That Pandava disregarding us and thee too
hath today outraged Subhadra, desiring (to compass) his own death. He
hath placed his foot on the crown of my head. How shall I, O Govinda,
tamely bear it? Shall I not resent it, even like a snake that is trodden
upon? Alone shall I today make the earth destitute of Kauravas! Never
shall I put up with this transgression by Arjuna.' Then all the Bhojas,
Vrishnis, and Andhakas, present there, approved of everything that
Valadeva had said, deeply roaring like unto a kettle-drum or the clouds.'"
