
SECTION CCXXIV
(Khandava-daha Parva)
"Vaisampayana said, 'The Pandavas, after they had taken up their abode at
Indraprastha at the command of Dhritarashtra and Bhishma began to bring
other kings under their sway. All the subjects (of the kingdom) lived
most happily depending upon Yudhishthira the just, like a soul living
happily depending upon a body blest with auspicious marks and pious
deeds. And, O bull in Bharata's race, Yudhishthira paid homage unto
virtue, pleasure, and profit, in judicious proportion, as if each were a
friend dear unto him as his own self. It seemed as if the three
pursuits--virtue, pleasure, and profit--became personified on earth, and
amongst them the king shone as a fourth. The subjects having obtained
Yudhishthira as their king, obtained in their monarch one that was
devoted to the study of the Vedas, one that was performer of the great
sacrifices, and one that was protector of all good people. In consequence
of Yudhishthira's influence, the good fortune of all the monarchs of the
earth became stationary, and their hearts became devoted to the
meditation of the Supreme Spirit, and virtue itself began to grow every
way all round. And in the midst of and assisted by his four brothers, the
king looked more resplendent (than he would have done if he were alone),
like a great sacrifice depending upon and assisted by the four Vedas.
Many learned Brahmanas with Dhananjaya at their head, each like unto
Vrihaspati, waited upon the monarch, like the celestials waiting upon the
Lord of the creation. From excess of affection, the eyes and hearts of
all the people equally took great delight in Yudhishthira who was even as
the full moon without a stain. The people took delight in him not only
because he was their king but also from sincere affection. The king
always did what was agreeable to them. The sweet-speeched Yudhishthira of
great intelligence never uttered anything that was improper or untrue or
unbearable or disagreeable. The best of monarchs of the Bharata race,
endued with great energy, passed his days happily for the welfare of all
as his own. His brothers also bringing by their energy other kings under
their sway, passed their days in happiness, without a foe to disturb
their peace.
"After a few days, Vibhatsu, addressing Krishna, said, 'The summer days
have set in, O Krishna! Therefore, let us go to the banks of the Yamuna.
O slayer of Madhu, sporting there in the company of friends, we will, O
Janardana, return in the evening'. Thereupon Vasudeva said, 'O son of
Kunti, this is also my wish. Let us, O Partha, sport in the waters as we
please, in the company of friends.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then, O Bharata, having consulted thus with
each other, Partha and Govinda, with Yudhishthira's leave, set out,
surrounded by friends. Reaching a fine spot (on the banks of the Yamuna)
suitable for purposes of pleasure, overgrown with numerous tall trees and
covered with several high mansions that made the place look like the
celestial city and within which had been collected for Krishna and Partha
numerous costly and well-flavoured viands and drinks and other articles
of enjoyment and floral wreaths and various perfumes, the party entered
without delay the inner apartments adorned with many precious gems of
pure rays. Entering those apartments, everybody, O Bharata, began to
sport, according to his pleasure. The women of the party, all of full
rotund hips and deep bosoms and handsome eyes, and gait unsteady with
wine began to sport there at the command of Krishna and Partha. Some
amongst the women sported as they liked in the woods, some in the waters,
and some within the mansions, as directed by Partha and Govinda. Draupadi
and Subhadra, exhilarated with wine, began to give away unto the women so
sporting, their costly robes and ornaments. And some amongst those women
began to dance in joy, and some began to sing; and some amongst them
began to laugh and jest, and some to drink excellent wines. Some began to
obstruct one another's progress and some to fight with one another, and
to discourse with one another in private. Those mansions and the woods,
filled with the charming music of flutes and guitars and kettledrums,
became the scene of Prosperity personified.
"When such was the state of things there, Arjuna and Vasudeva went to a
certain charming spot (in those woods) not far from the place where the
others were. O monarch, the high-souled Krishna, and that subjugators of
hostile cities, viz., Arjuna, going thither, sat down upon two very
costly seats. Vasudeva and Partha amused themselves there with
discoursing upon many past achievements of prowess and other topics. Unto
Vasudeva and Dhananjaya happily sitting there like the Aswins in heaven,
a certain Brahmana came. The Brahmana that came there looked like a tall
Sala tree. His complexion was like unto molten gold; his beard was bright
yellow tinged with green; and the height and the thickness of the body
were in just proportion. Of matted locks and dressed in rags, he
resembled the morning sun in splendour. Of eyes like lotus-petals and of
a tawny hue, he seemed to be blazing with effulgence. Beholding that
foremost of Brahmanas blazing with splendour approach towards them both
Arjuna and Vasudeva, hastily rising from their seats, stood, waiting (for
his commands).'"
