
SECTION CCXXI
(Subhadra-harana Parva)
"Vaisampayana said, 'O best of monarchs, within a few days after this,
there commenced on the Raivataka mountain, a grand festival of the
Vrishnis and the Andhakas. At the mountain-festival of the Bhojas, the
Vrishnis and the Andhakas, the heroes of those tribes began to give away
much wealth unto Brahmanas by thousands. The region around that hill, O
king was adorned with many a mansion decked with gems and many an
artificial tree of gaudy hue. The musicians struck up in concert and the
dancers began to dance and the vocalists to sing. And the youth of the
Vrishni race, endued with great energy, adorned with every ornament, and
riding in their gold-decked cars, looked extremely handsome. The
citizens, some on foot and some in excellent cars, with their wives and
followers were there by hundreds and thousands. And there was the lord
Haladhara (Valarama), roving at will, hilarious with drink, accompanied
by (his wife) Revati, and followed by many musicians and vocalists. There
came Ugrasena also, the powerful king of he Vrishni race, accompanied by
his thousand wives and followed by sweet singers. And Raukmineya and
Shamva also, ever furious in battle, roved there, excited with drink and
adorned with floral wreaths of great beauty and with costly attires, and
disported themselves like a pair of celestials. And Akrura and Sarana and
Gada, and Vabhru, and Nisatha, and Charudeshna, and Prithu, Viprithu, and
Satyaka, and Satyaki, and Bhangakara, and Maharava, and Hardikya, and
Uddhava, and many others whose names are not given, accompanied by their
wives that followed by bands of singers, adorned that mountain-festival.
When that delightful festival of immense grandeur commenced, Vasudeva and
Partha went about, together, beholding everything around. While wandering
there, they saw the handsome daughter of Vasudeva, Bhadra by name, decked
with every ornament, in the midst of her maids. As soon as Arjuna beheld
her he was possessed by the god of desire. Then, O Bharata, that tiger
among men, Krishna, observing Partha contemplate her with absorbed
attention, said with a smile, 'How is this? Can the heart of one that
rangeth the woods be agitated by the god of desire? This is my sister, O
Partha, and the uterine sister of Sarana. Blest be thou, her name is
Bhadra and she is the favourite daughter of my father. Tell me if thy
heart is fixed upon her, for I shall then speak to my father myself.'
"Arjuna answered, 'She is Vasudeva's daughter and Vasudeva's (Krishna)
sister; endued with so much beauty, whom can she not fascinate? If this
thy sister, this maid of the Vrishni race, becometh my wife, truly may I
win prosperity in everything. Tell me, O Janardana, by what means I may
obtain her. To get her I will achieve anything that is achievable by man.'
"Vasudeva answered, 'O bull amongst men, self-choice hath been ordained
for the marriage of Kshatriyas. But that is doubtful (in its
consequences), O Partha, as we do not know this girl's temper and
disposition. In the case of Kshatriyas that are brave, a forcible
abduction for purposes of marriage is applauded, as the learned have
said. Therefore O Arjuna, carry away this my beautiful sister by force,
for who knows what she may do at a self-choice.' Then Krishna and Arjuna,
having thus settled as to what should be done sent some speedy messengers
unto Yudhishthira at Indraprastha, informing him of everything. The
strong-armed Yudhishthira, as soon as he heard it, gave his assent to
it.'"
