
SECTION XXII
"Sauti said, 'The Nagas after consultation arrived at the conclusion that
they should do their mother's bidding, for if she failed in obtaining her
desire she might withdraw her affection and burn them all. If, on the
other hand, she were graciously inclined, she might free them from her
curse. They said, 'We will certainly render the horse's tail black.' And
it is said that they then went and became hairs in the horse's tail.
"Now the two co-wives had laid the wager. And having laid the wager, O
best of Brahmanas, the two sisters Kadru and Vinata, the daughters of
Daksha, proceeded in great delight along the sky to see the other side of
the Ocean. And on their way they saw the Ocean, that receptacle of
waters, incapable of being easily disturbed, mightily agitated all of a
sudden by the wind, and roaring tremendously; abounding with fishes
capable of swallowing the whale and full of makaras; containing also
creatures of diverse forms counted by thousands; frightful from the
presence of horrible monsters, inaccessible, deep, and terrible, the mine
of all kinds of gems, the home of Varuna (the water-god), the wonderful
habitations of the Nagas, the lord of rivers, the abode of the
subterranean fire; the residence of the Asuras and of many dreadful
creatures; the reservoir of water, not subject to decay, aromatic, and
wonderful, the great source of the amrita of the celestials; immeasurable
and inconceivable, containing waters that are holy, filled to the brim by
many thousands of great rivers, dancing as it were in waves. Such was the
Ocean, full of rolling waves, vast as the expanse of the sky, deep, of
body lighted with the flames of subterranean fire, and roaring, which the
sisters quickly passed over.'"
And so ends the twenty-second section in the Astika Parva of the Adi
Parva.
Parva.
Parva.
Parva.
