
SECTION CCXXXIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing those words of her sons Jarita continued,
'The little mouse that had come out of this hole was seized by a hawk
with his claws and carried away hence. Therefore, ye may fearlessly enter
this hole now.' The young ones replied, 'We are not by any means certain
of that mouse having been taken away by the hawk. There may be other mice
living here. From them we have every fear. Whereas it is doubtful whether
fire will at all approach us here. Already we see an adverse wind blowing
the flames away. If we enter the hole, death is certain at the hands of
the dwellers in the hole. But if we remain where we are, death is
uncertain. O mother, a position in which death is uncertain is better
than that in which it is certain. It is thy duty, therefore, to escape
thyself, for, if thou livest thou mayest obtain other children as good.'
"Their mother then said, 'Ye children, I myself saw the mighty hawk, that
best of birds, swoop down and fly away with the mouse from the hole. And
while he was flying away swiftly, I followed him behind and pronounced
blessing on him for his having taken away the mouse from the hole. I said
unto him. 'O king of hawks, because thou art flying away with our enemy,
the mouse, in thy claws, mayest thou, without a foe, live in heaven with
a golden body.' Afterwards when that hawk devoured the mouse, I came
away, obtaining his leave. Therefore, ye children, enter this hole
trustfully. Ye have nothing to fear. The mouse that was its inmate was
seized and taken away by the hawk in my sight.' The young ones again
said, 'O mother, we do not by any means know that the mouse hath been
carried away by the hawk. We cannot enter this hole in the ground without
being certain of the fact.' Their mother said, 'I know to a certainty
that the mouse hath been carried away by the hawk. Therefore, ye
children, ye have nothing to fear; do what I say.' The young ones again
said, 'We do not, O mother, say that thou art dispelling our fears with a
false story. For whatever is done by a person when his reason hath been
disturbed can scarcely be said to be that person's deliberate act. Thou
hast not been benefited by us, nor dost thou know who we are. Why dost
thou, therefore, strive to protect us at so much cost to thyself? Who are
we to thee? Thou art young and handsome, and capable of seeking out thy
husband. Go unto thy husband. Thou shalt obtain good children again. Let
us by entering the fire attain to regions of felicity. If, however, the
fire consume us not, thou mayest come back and obtain us again.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'The parent bird then, thus addressed by her sons,
left them in Khandava and hastily went to the spot where there was no
fire and there was safety. Then Agni in haste and with fierce flames
approached the spot where the sons of Mandapala were. The young birds saw
the blazing fire come towards them. Then Jaritari, the eldest of the
four, in the hearing of Agni, began to speak.'"
