
SECTION CCXXXI
"Janamejaya said, 'O Brahmana, tell me why and when that forest burnt in
that way, Agni consumed not the birds called Sarngakas? Thou hast, O
Brahmana, recited (to us) the cause of Aswasena and the Danava Maya not
having been consumed. But thou hast not as yet said what the cause was of
the escape of the Sarngakas? The escape of those birds, O Brahmana,
appeareth to me to be wonderful. Tell us why they were not destroyed in
that dreadful conflagration.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'O slayer of all foes, I shall tell thee all as to
why Agni did not burn up those birds during the conflagration. There was,
O king, a great Rishi known by the name of Mandapala, conversant with all
the shastras, of rigid vows, devoted to asceticism, and the foremost of
all virtuous persons. Following in the wake of Rishis that had drawn up
their virile fluid, that ascetic, O monarch, with every sense under
complete control, devoted himself to study and virtue. Having reached the
opposite shores of asceticism, O Bharata, he left his human form and went
to the region of the Pitris. But going thither he failed to obtain the
(expected) fruit of his acts. He asked the celestials that sat around the
king of the dead as to the cause of his treatment, saying, 'Why have
these regions become unattainable by me,--regions that I had thought had
been acquired by me by my ascetic devotions? Have I not performed those
acts whose fruits are these regions? Ye inhabitants of heaven, tell me
why these regions are shut against me! I will do that which will give me
the fruit of my ascetic penances.'
"The celestials answered, 'Hear, O Brahmana, of those acts and things on
account of which men are born debtors. Without doubt, it is for religious
rites, studies according to the ordinance, and progeny, that men are born
debtors. These debts are all discharged by sacrifices, asceticism, and
offspring. Thou art an ascetic and hast also performed sacrifices; but
thou hast no offspring. These regions are shut against thee only for want
of children. Beget children, therefore! Thou shalt then enjoy
multifarious regions of felicity. The Vedas declared that the son
rescueth the father from a hell called Put. Then, O best of Brahmanas,
strive to beget offspring.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Mandapala, having heard these words of the
dwellers in heaven, reflected how best he could obtain the largest number
of offspring within the shortest period of time. The Rishi, after
reflection, understood that of all creatures birds alone were blest with
fecundity. Assuming the form of a Sarngaka the Rishi had connection with
a female bird of the same species called by the name of Jarita. And he
begat upon her four sons who were all reciters of the Vedas. Leaving all
those sons of his with their mother in that forest, while they were still
within eggs, the ascetic went to (another wife called by the name of)
Lapita. And, O Bharata, when the exalted sage went away for the company
of Lapita, moved by affection for her offspring, Jarita became very
thoughtful. Though forsaken by their father in the forest of Khandava,
Jarita, anxious in her affection for them, could not forsake her
offspring, those infant Rishis encased in eggs. Moved by parental
affection, she brought up these children born of her, herself following
the pursuits proper to her own species. Some time after, the Rishi, in
wandering over that forest in the company of Lapita, saw Agni coming
towards Khandava to burn it down. Then the Brahmana Mandapala, knowing
the intention of Agni and remembering also that his children were all
young moved by fear, gratified the god, of the burning element, that
regent of the universe, endued with great energy. And he did this,
desiring to put in a word for his unfledged offspring. Addressing Agni,
the Rishi said, 'Thou art, O Agni, the mouth of all the worlds! Thou art
the carrier of the sacrificial butter! O purifier (of all sins), thou
movest invisible with the frame of every creature! The learned have
spoken of thee as an One, and again as possessed of triple nature. The
wise perform their sacrifices before thee, taking thee as consisting of
eight (mouths). The great Rishis declare that this universe hath been
created by thee. O thou that feedest on sacrificial butter, without thee
this whole universe would be destroyed in a single day. Bowing to thee,
the Brahmanas, accompanied by their wives and children, go to eternal
regions won by them by help of their own deeds. O Agni, the learned
represent thee as the clouds in the heavens charged with lightning. O
Agni, the flames put forth by thee consume every creature. O thou of
great splendour, this universe hath been created by thee. The Vedas are
thy word. All creatures, mobile and immobile, depend upon thee. Water
primarily dependeth on thee, so also the whole of this universe. All
offerings of clarified butter and oblations of food to the pitris have
been established in thee. O god, thou art the consumer, and thou art the
creator and thou art Vrihaspati himself (in intelligence). Thou art the
twin Aswins; thou art Surya; thou art Soma; thou art Vayu.
"Vaisampayana continued, 'O monarch, thus praised by Mandapala, Agni was
gratified with that Rishi of immeasurable energy; and the god,
well-pleased, replied, 'What good can I do to thee?' Then Mandapala with
joined palms said unto the carrier of clarified butter, 'While thou
burnest the forest of Khandava, spare my children.' The illustrious
bearer of clarified butter replied, 'So be it.' It was, therefore, O
monarch, that he blazed not forth, while consuming the forest of
Khandava, for the destruction of Mandapala's children.'"
