SECTION III
"Vaisampayana said,--"Then Maya Danava addressed Arjuna, that foremost of
successful warriors, saying,--'I now go with thy leave, but shall come
back soon. On the north of the Kailasa peak near the mountains of
Mainaka, while the Danavas were engaged in a sacrifice on the banks of
Vindu lake, I gathered a huge quantity of delightful and variegated vanda
(a kind of rough materials) composed of jewels and gems. This was placed
in the mansion of Vrishaparva ever devoted to truth. If it be yet
existing, I shall come back, O Bharata, with it. I shall then commence
the construction of the delightful palace of the Pandavas, which is to be
adorned with every kind of gems and celebrated all over the world. There
is also, I think, O thou of the Kuru race, a fierce club placed in the
lake Vindu by the King (of the Danavas) after slaughtering therewith all
his foes in battle. Besides being heavy and strong and variegated with
golden knobs, it is capable of bearing great weight, and of slaying all
foes, and is equal in strength unto an hundred thousand clubs. It is a
fit weapon for Bhima, even as the Gandiva is for thee. There is also (in
that lake) a large conch-shell called Devadatta of loud sound, that came
from Varuna. I shall no doubt give all these to thee. Having spoken thus
unto Partha, the Asura went away in a north-easterly direction. On the
north of Kailasa in the mountains of Mainaka, there is a huge peak of
gems and jewels called Hiranya-sringa. Near that peak is a delightful
lake of the name of Vindu. There, on its banks, previously dwelt king
Bhagiratha for many years, desiring to behold the goddess Ganga, since
called Bhagirathee after that king's name. And there, on its banks, O
thou best of the Bharatas, Indra the illustrious lord of every created
thing, performed one hundred great sacrifices. There, for the sake of
beauty, though not according to the dictates of the ordinance, were
placed sacrificial stakes made of gems and altars of gold. There, after
performing those sacrifices, the thousand-eyed lord of Sachi became
crowned with success. There the fierce Mahadeva, the eternal lord of
every creature, has taken up his abode after having created all the
worlds and there he dwelleth, worshipped with reverence by thousands of
spirits. There Nara and Narayana, Brahma and Yama and Sthanu the fifth,
perform their sacrifices at the expiration of a thousand yugas. There,
for the establishment of virtue and religion, Vasudeva, with pious
devotion, performed his sacrifices extending for many, many long years.
There were placed by Keshava thousands and tens of thousands of
sacrificial stakes adorned with golden garlands and altars of great
splendour. Going thither, O Bharata, Maya brought back the club and the
conch-shell and the various crystalline articles that had belonged to
king Vrishaparva. And the great Asura, Maya, having gone thither,
possessed himself of the whole of the great wealth which was guarded by
Yakshas and Rakshasas. Bringing them, the Asura constructed therewith a
peerless palace, which was of great beauty and of celestial make,
composed entirely of gems and precious stones, and celebrated throughout
the three worlds. He gave unto Bhimasena that best of clubs, and unto
Arjuna the most excellent conch-shell at whose sound all creatures
trembled in awe. And the palace that Maya built consisted of columns of
gold, and occupied, O monarch, an area of five thousand cubits. The
palace, possessing an exceedingly beautiful form, like unto that of Agni
or Suryya, or Soma, shone in great splendour, and by its brilliance
seemed to darken even the bright rays of the sun. And with the effulgence
it exhibited, which was a mixture of both celestial and terrestrial
light, it looked as if it was on fire. Like unto a mass of new clouds
conspicuous in the sky, the palace rose up coming into view of all.
Indeed, the palace that the dexterous Maya built was so wide, delightful,
and refreshing, and composed of such excellent materials, and furnished
with such golden walls and archways, and adorned with so many varied
pictures, and was withal so rich and well-built, that in beauty it far
surpassed Sudharma of the Dasarha race, or the mansion of Brahma himself.
And eight thousand Rakshasas called Kinkaras, fierce, huge-bodied and
endued with great strength, of red coppery eyes and arrowy ears,
well-armed and capable of ranging through the air, used to guard and
protect that palace. Within that palace Maya placed a peerless tank, and
in that tank were lotuses with leaves of dark-coloured gems and stalks of
bright jewels, and other flowers also of golden leaves. And aquatic fowls
of various species sported on its bosom. Itself variegated with
full-blown lotuses and stocked with fishes and tortoises of golden hue,
its bottom was without mud and its water transparent. There was a flight
of crystal stairs leading from the banks to the edge of the water. The
gentle breezes that swept along its bosom softly shook the flowers that
studded it. The banks of that tank were overlaid with slabs of costly
marble set with pearls. And beholding that tank thus adorned all around
with jewels and precious stones, many kings that came there mistook it
for land and fell into it with eyes open. Many tall trees of various
kinds were planted all around the palace. Of green foliage and cool
shade, and ever blossoming, they were all very charming to behold.
Artificial woods were laid around, always emitting a delicious fragrance.
And there were many tanks also that were adorned with swans and
Karandavas and Chakravakas (Brahminy ducks) in the grounds lying about
the mansion. And the breeze bearing the fragrance of lotuses growing in
water and (of those growing on land) ministered unto the pleasure and
happiness of the Pandavas. And Maya having constructed such a palatial
hall within fourteen months, reported its completion unto Yudhishthira."
