SECTION I
(Sabhakriya Parva)
Om! After having bowed down to Narayana, and Nara, the most exalted male
being, and also to the goddess Saraswati, must the word Jaya be uttered.
"Vaisampayana said,--"Then, in the presence of Vasudeva, Maya Danava,
having worshipped Arjuna, repeatedly spoke unto him with joined hands and
in amiable words,--'O son of Kunti, saved have I been by thee from this
Krishna in spate and from Pavaka (fire) desirous of consuming me. Tell me
what I have to do for thee.
"Arjuna said,--'O great Asura, everything hath already been done by thee
(even by this offer of thine). Blest be thou. Go whithersoever thou
likest. Be kind and well-disposed towards me, as we are even kind to and
well-pleased with thee!'
"Maya said,--'O bull amongst men, what thou hast said is worthy of thee,
O exalted one. But O Bharata, I desire to do something for thee
cheerfully. I am a great artist, a Viswakarma among the Danavas. O son of
Pandu, being what I am, I desire to do something for thee.'
"Arjuna said,--'O sinless one, thou regardest thyself as saved (by me)
from imminent death. Even if it hath been so, I cannot make thee do
anything for me. At the same time, O Danava, I do not wish to frustrate
thy intentions. Do thou something for Krishna. That will be a sufficient
requital for my services to thee.'
Vaisampayana said,--"Then, O bull of the Bharata race, urged by Maya,
Vasudeva reflected for a moment as to what he should ask Maya to
accomplish. Krishna, the Lord of the universe and the Creator of every
object, having reflected in his mind, thus commanded Maya,--'Let a
palatial sabha (meeting hall) as thou choosest, be built (by thee), if
thou, O son of Diti, who art the foremost of all artists, desirest to do
good to Yudhishthira the just. Indeed, build thou such a palace that
persons belonging to the world of men may not be able to imitate it even
after examining it with care, while seated within. And, O Maya, build
thou a mansion in which we may behold a combination of godly, asuric and
human designs.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Having heard those words, Maya became
exceedingly glad. And he forthwith built a magnificent palace for the son
of Pandu like unto the palace of the celestials themselves. Then Krishna
and Partha (Arjuna) after having narrated everything unto king
Yudhishthira the just, introduced Maya unto him. Yudhishthira received
Maya with respect, offering him the honour he deserved. And, O Bharata,
Maya accepted that honour thinking highly of it. O monarch of the Bharata
race, that great son of Diti then recited unto the sons of Pandu the
history of the Danava Vrisha-parva, and that foremost of artists then,
having rested awhile, set himself after much thoughtful planning to build
a palace for the illustrious sons of Pandu. Agreeably to the wishes of
both Krishna and the sons of Pritha, the illustrious Danava of great
prowess, having performed on an auspicious day the initial propitiatory
rites of foundation and having also gratified thousands of well-versed
Brahmanas with sweetened milk and rice and with rich presents of various
kinds, measured out a plot of land five thousand cubits square, which was
delightful and exceedingly handsome to behold and which was favourable
for construction of a building well-suited to the exigencies of every
season."
