SECTION XIII
Vaisampayana said,--"Yudhishthira, having heard these words of Narada,
began to sigh heavily. And, O Bharata, engaged in his thoughts about the
Rajasuya, the king had no peace of mind. Having heard of this glory of
the illustrious monarchs (of old) and being certain about the acquisition
of regions of felicity by performers of sacrifices in consequence of
their sacred deeds, and thinking especially of that royal sage
Harischandra who had performed the great sacrifice king Yudhishthira
desired to make preparations for the Rajasuya sacrifice. Then worshipping
his counsellors and others present at his Sabha, and worshipped by them
in return, he began to discuss with them about that sacrifice. Having
reflected much, that king of kings, that bull amongst the Kurus, inclined
his mind towards making preparations for the Rajasuya. That prince of
wonderful energy and prowess, however, reflecting upon virtue and
righteousness, again set his heart to find out what would be for the good
of all his people. For Yudhishthira, that foremost of all virtuous men,
always kind unto his subjects, worked for the good of all without making
any distinctions. Indeed, shaking off both anger and arrogance,
Yudhishthira always said,--Give unto each what is due to each,--and the
only sounds that he could hear were,--Blessed be Dharma! Blessed be
Dharma! Yudhishthira! conducting himself thus and giving paternal
assurance to everybody, there was none in the kingdom who entertained any
hostile feelings towards him. He therefore came to be called Ajatasatru
(one with no enemy at all). The king cherished every one as belonging to
his family, and Bhima ruled over all justly. Arjuna, used to employing
both his hands with equal skill, protected the people from (external)
enemies. And the wise Sahadeva administered justice impartially. And
Nakula behaved towards all with humility that was natural to him. Owing
to all this, the kingdom became free from disputes and fear of every
kind. And all the people became attentive to their respective
occupations. The rain became so abundant as to leave no room for desiring
more; and the kingdom grew in prosperity. And in consequence of the
virtues of the king, money-lenders, the articles required for sacrifices,
cattle-rearing, tillage, and traders, all and everything grew in
prosperity. Indeed, during the reign of Yudhishthira who was ever devoted
to truth, there was no extortion, no stringent realisation of arrears of
rent, no fear of disease, of fire, or of death by poisoning and
incantations, in the kingdom. It was never heard at that time that
thieves or cheats or royal favourites ever behaved wrongfully towards the
king or towards one another amongst themselves. Kings conquered on the
six occasions (of war, treaty, &c.) were wont to wait upon him in order
to do good unto the monarch and worship him ever, while the traders of
different classes came to pay him the taxes leviable on their respective
occupations. And accordingly during the reign of Yudhishthira who was
ever devoted to virtue, his dominion grew in prosperity. Indeed, the
prosperity of the kingdom was increased not by these alone but even by
persons wedded to voluptuousness and indulging in all luxuries to their
fill. And the king of kings, Yudhishthira, whose sway extended over all,
was possessed of every accomplishment and bore everything with patience.
And, O king, whatever countries the celebrated and illustrious monarch
conquered, the people everywhere, from Brahmanas to swains, were all more
attached to him than to their own fathers and mothers.'
Vaisampayana said,--"King Yudhishthira, then, that foremost of speakers,
summoning together his counsellors and brothers, asked them repeatedly
about the Rajasuya sacrifice. Those ministers in a body, thus asked by
the wise Yudhishthira desirous of performing the sacrifice, then told him
these words of grave import,--'One already in possession of a kingdom
desireth all the attributes of an emperor by means of that sacrifice
which aideth a king in acquiring the attributes of Varuna. O prince of
Kuru race, thy friends think that as thou art worthy of the attributes of
an emperor, the time is even come for thee for the performance of the
Rajasuya sacrifice. The time for the performance of that sacrifice in
which Rishis of austere vows kindle six fires with mantras of the Sama
Veda, is come for thee in consequence of thy Kshatriya possessions. At
the conclusion of the Rajasuya sacrifice when the performer is installed
in the sovereignty of the empire, he is rewarded with the fruits of all
sacrifices including the Agnihotra. It is for this that he is called the
conqueror of all. Thou art quite able, O strong-armed one, to perform
this sacrifice. All of us are obedient to thee. Soon will you be able, O
great king, to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice. Therefore, O great king,
let thy resolution be taken to perform this sacrifice without further
discussion. Thus, spoke unto the king all his friends and counsellors
separately and jointly. And, O king, Yudhishthira that slayer of all
enemies, having heard these virtuous, bold, agreeable and weighty words
of theirs, accepted them mentally. And having heard those words of his
friends and counsellors, and knowing his own strength also, the king, O
Bharata, repeatedly thought over the matter. After this the intelligent
and virtuous Yudhishthira, wise in counsel, again consulted with his
brothers, with the illustrious Ritwijas about him, with his ministers and
with Dhaumya and Dwaipayana and others.
'Yudhishthira said,--"How may this wish that I entertain of performing
the excellent sacrifice of Rajasuya that is worthy of an emperor, bear
fruit, in consequence of my faith and speech alone.'"
Vaisampayana said,--"O thou of eyes like lotus-petals, thus asked by the
king, they replied at that time unto Yudhishthira the just in these
words,--Being conversant with the dictates of morality, thou art, O king,
worthy to perform the grand sacrifice of Rajasuya. After the Ritwijas and
the Rishis  had told these words unto the king, his ministers and
brothers highly approved of the speech. The king, however, possessed of
great wisdom, and with mind under complete control, actuated by the
desire of doing good unto the world, again resolved the matter in his
mind, thinking of his own strength and means, the circumstances of time
and place and his income and expenditure. For he knew that the wise never
come to grief owing to their always acting after full deliberation.
Thinking that the sacrifice should not be commenced, pursuant to his own
resolution only, Yudhishthira, carefully bearing upon his shoulder the
weight of affairs thought of Krishna that persecutor of all sinners as
the fittest person to decide the matter, in as much as he knew him to be
the foremost of all persons, possessed of immeasurable energy,
strong-armed, without birth but born amongst men from Will alone.
Reflecting upon his god-like feats the son of Pandu concluded that there
was nothing that was unknown to him, nothing that he could not achieve,
and nothing that he could not bear, and Yudhishthira, the son of Pritha,
having come to this settled resolution soon sent a messenger unto that
master of all beings, conveying through him blessings and speeches such
as one senior in age might send to one that is younger. And that
messenger riding in a swift car arrived amongst the Yadavas and
approached Krishna who was then residing in Dwaravati. And Achyuta
(Krishna) hearing that the son of Pritha had become desirous of seeing
him, desired to see his cousin. And quickly passing over many regions,
being drawn by his own swift horses, Krishna arrived at Indraprastha,
accompanied by Indrasena. And having arrived at Indraprastha, Janardana
approached Yudhisthira without loss of time. And Yudhisthira received
Krishna with paternal-affection, and Bhima also received him likewise.
And Janardana then went with a cheerful heart to his father's sister
(Kunti). And worshipped then with reverence by the twins, he began to
converse cheerfully with his friend Arjuna who was overjoyed at seeing
him. And after he had rested awhile in a pleasant apartment and had been
fully refreshed, Yudhishthira approached him at his leisure and informed
him all about the Rajasuya sacrifice.
"Yudhishthira said,--'I have wished to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice.
That sacrifice, however, cannot be performed by one's wishing alone to
perform it. Thou knowest, O Krishna, even thing about the means by which
it may be accomplished. He alone can achieve this sacrifice in whom
everything is possible, who is worshipped everywhere and who is the king
of kings. My friends and counsellors approaching me have said that I
should perform that sacrifice. But, O Krishna, in respect of that matter,
thy words shall be my guide. Of counsellers some from friendship do not
notice the difficulties; others from motives of self-interest say only
what is agreeable. Some again regard that which is beneficial to
themselves as worthy of adoption. Men are seen to counsel thus on matters
awaiting decision. But thou, O Krishna, art above such motives. Thou hast
conquered both desire and anger. It behoveth thee to tell me what is most
beneficial to the world."
