SECTION XVIII
"Krishna continued,--'hearing these words of the king, the Rakshasa woman
answered--Blessed be thou, O king of kings. Capable of assuming any form
at will. I am a Rakshasa woman called Jara. I am living, O king, happily
in thy house, worshipped by all. Every day I wander from house to house
of men. Indeed, I was created of old by the Self-create and was named
Grihadevi (the household goddess)'. Of celestial beauty I was placed (in
the world) for the destruction of the Danavas. He that with devotion
painteth on the walls (of his house) a likeness of myself endued with
youth and in the midst of children, must have prosperity in his abode;
otherwise a household must sustain decay and destruction. O lord, painted
on the walls of thy house is a likeness of myself surrounded by numerous
children. Stationed there I am daily worshipped with scents and flowers,
with incense and edibles and various objects of enjoyment. Thus
worshipped in thy house, I daily think of doing thee some good in return.
It chanced, O virtuous king, that I beheld the fragmentary bodies of thy
son. When these happened to be united by me, a living child was formed of
them. O great king, it hath been so owing to thy good fortune alone. I
have been only the instrument, I am capable of swallowing the mountain of
Meru itself, what shall I say of the child? I have, however, been
gratified with thee in consequence of the worship I receive in thy house.
It is, therefore, O king, that I have bestowed this child on thee.
"Krishna continued,--Having spoken these words, O king, Jara disappeared
there and then. The king having obtained the child then entered the
palace. And the king then caused all the rites of infancy to be performed
on that child, and ordered a festival to be observed by his people in
Honour of that Rakshasa woman. And the monarch equal unto Brahma himself
then bestowed a name on his child. And he said that because the child had
been united by Jara, he should be called (Jarasandha i.e., united by
Jara). And the son of the king of Magadha endued with great energy, began
to grow up in bulk and strength like a fire into which hath been poured
libation of clarified butter. And increasing day by day like the moon in
the bright fortnight, the child began to enhance the joy of his parents.'"
