SECTION XV
"Yudhishthira said,--"Intelligent as thou art, thou hast said what none
else is capable of saying. There is none else on earth who is settler of
all doubts. Behold, there are kings in every province employed in
benefiting their respective selves. But no one amongst them hath been
able to achieve the imperial dignity. Indeed, the title emperor is
difficult of acquisition. He that knoweth the valour and strength of
others never applaudeth himself. He, indeed, is really worthy of applause
(worship) who, engaged in encounters with his enemies, beareth himself
commendably. O thou supporter of the dignity of the Vrishni race, man's
desires and propensities, like the wide earth itself adorned with many
jewels, are varied and extensive. As experience can seldom be gained but
by travelling in regions remote from one's home, so salvation can never
be attained except by acting according to principles that are very high,
compared with the ordinary level of our desire and propensities. I regard
peace of mind as the highest object here, for from that quality may
proceed my prosperity. In my judgment, if I undertake to celebrate this
sacrifice, I shall never win the highest reward. O Janardana, endued with
energy and intelligence, these that have been born in our race think that
some one amongst them will at one time become the foremost amongst all
Kshatriyas. But, O exalted one, we also were all frightened by the fear
of Jarasandha and, O sinless one, by the wickedness of that monarch. O
thou invincible in battle, the might of thy arm is my refuge. When,
therefore, thou taken fright at Jarasandha's might, how should I regard
myself strong in comparison with him? Madhava, O thou of the Vrishni
race, I am repeatedly depressed by the thought whether Jarasandha is
capable or not of being slain by thee, by Rama, by Bhimasena, or by
Arjuna. But what shall I say, O Keshava? Thou art my highest authority on
everything.'
"On hearing these words, Bhima well-skilled in speech said,--'That king
who is without exertion, or who being weak and without resources entereth
into hostility with one that is strong, perisheth like an ant-hill. It
may be generally seen, however, that even a king that is weak may
vanquish an enemy that is strong and obtain the fruition of all his
wishes, by wakefulness and by the application of policy. In Krishna is
policy, in myself strength, in Arjuna triumphs. So like the three
(sacrificial) fires that accomplish a sacrifice, we shall accomplish the
death of the king of Magadha."
"Krishna then said,--'One that is immature in understanding seeketh the
fruition of his desire without an eye to what may happen to him in
future. It is seen that no one forgiveth for that reason a foe that is of
immature understanding and inclined to serve his own interests. It hath
been heard by us that in the krita age, having brought every one under
their subjection, Yauvanaswin by the abolition of all taxes, Bhagiratha
by his kind treatment to his subjects, Kartavirya by the energy of his
asceticism, the lord Bharata by his strength and valour, and Maruta by
his prosperity, all these five became emperors. But, O Yudhishthira, thou
who covetest the imperial dignity deserves it, not by one but by all
these qualities, viz., victory, protection afforded to thy people,
virtue, prosperity, and policy. Know, O bull of the Kuru race, that
Jarasandha, the son of Vrihadratha, is even such (i.e., a candidate for
the imperial dignity). A hundred dynasties of kings have become unable to
oppose Jarasandha. He, therefore, may be regarded to be an emperor for
his strength. Kings that are wearers of jewels worship Jarasandha (with
presents of jewels). But, wicked from his childhood, he is scarcely
satisfied with such worship. Having become the foremost among all, he
attacketh yet with violence kings with crowns on their heads. Nor is
there seen any king from whom he taketh not tribute. Thus hath he brought
under his sway nearly a hundred kings. How can, O son of Pritha, any weak
monarch approach him with hostile intentions? Confined in the temple of
Shiva and offered as sacrifice unto him like so many animals, do not
these monarchs dedicated unto that god feel the most poignant misery, O
bull of the Bharata race? A Kshatriya that dieth in battle is ever
regarded with respect. Why shall we not, therefore, meet together and
oppose Jarsandha in battle? He hath already brought eighty-six kings;
fourteen only are wanting to complete one hundred. As soon as he
obtaineth those fourteen, he will begin his cruel act. He that shall be
to obstruct that act will surely win blazing renown. And he that will
vanquish Jarasandha will surely become the emperor of all the
Kshatriyas.'"
