SECTION XXI
"Vasudeva said,--'behold, O Partha, the great capital of Magadha,
standing in all its beauty. Filled with flocks and herds and its stock of
water never exhausted, and adorned also with fine mansions standing in
excellent array, it is free from every kind of calamity. The five large
hills of Vaihara, Varaha, Vrishava, Rishigiri, and the delightful
Chaitya, all of high peaks and overgrown with tall trees of cool shade
and connected with one another, seem to be jointly protecting the city of
Girivraja. The breasts of the hills are concealed by forests of
delightful and fragrant Lodhras having the ends of their branches covered
with flowers. It was here that the illustrious Gautama of rigid vows
begat on the Sudra woman Ausinari (the daughter of Usinara) Kakshivat and
other celebrated sons. That the race sprung from Gautama doth yet live
under the sway of an ordinary human race (of monarchs) is only evidence
of Gautama's kindness to kings. And, O Arjuna, it was here that in olden
times the mighty monarchs of Anga, and Vanga and other countries, came to
the abode of Gautama, and passed their days in joy and happiness. Behold,
O Partha, those forests of delightful Pippalas and beautiful Lodhras
standing near the side of Gautama's abode. There dwelt in old days those
Nagas, Arvuda and Sakravapin, those persecutors of all enemies, as also
the Naga Swastika and that other excellent Naga called Manu. Manu himself
had ordered the country of the Magadhas to be never afflicted with
drought, and Kaushika and Manimat also have favoured the country. Owning
such a delightful and impregnable city, Jarasandha is ever bent on
seeking the fruition of his purposes unlike other monarchs. We shall,
however, by slaying him to-day humble his pride."
Vaisampayana said,--Thus saying those brothers of abundant energy, viz.,
he of the Vrishni race and the two Pandavas entered the city of Magadha.
They then approached towards the impregnable city of Girivraja that was
full of cheerful and well-fed inhabitants belonging to all the four
orders, and where festivities were perennial. On arriving then at the
gate of the city, the brothers (instead of passing through it) began to
pierce (with their shafts) the heart of the high Chaityaka peak that was
worshipped by the race of Vrihadratha, as also by the citizens and which
delighted the hearts of all the Magadhas. There Vrihadratha had slain a
cannibal called Rishava and having slain the monster made of his hide
three drums which he placed in his own city. And those drums were such
that once beaten their sound lasted one full month. And the brothers
broke down the Chaityaka peak that was delightful to all the Magadhas, at
that point where those drums covered with celestial flowers used to yield
their continuous sound. And desirous of slaying Jarasandha they seemed by
that act of theirs to place their feet upon the head of their foe. And
attacking with their mighty arms that immovable and huge and high and old
and celebrated peak always worshipped with perfumes and floral wreaths,
those heroes broke it down. And with joyful hearts they then entered the
city. And it so happened that the learned Brahmanas residing within the
city saw many evil omens which they reported to Jarasandha. And the
priest making the king mount an elephant whirled lighted brands about
him. And king Jarasandha also, possessed of great prowess, with a view to
warding of those evils, entered upon the celebration of a sacrifice, with
proper vows and fasts. Meanwhile, O Bharata, the brothers unarmed, or
rather with their bare arms as their only weapons, desirous of fighting
with Jarasandha, entered the capital in the guise of Brahmanas. They
beheld the extraordinary beauty of the shops full of various edibles and
floral wreaths, and supplied with articles of every variety of various
qualities that man can desire. Those best of men, Krishna, Bhima, and
Dhananjaya, beholding in those shops their affluence, passed along the
public road. And endued with great strength they snatched forcibly from
the flower-vendors the garlands they had exposed for sale. And attired in
robes of various colours and decked in garlands and ear-rings the heroes
entered the abode of Jarasandha possessed of great intelligence, like
Himalayan lions eyeing cattle-folds. And the arms of those warriors, O
king, besmeared with sandal paste, looked like the trunks of sala trees.
The people of Magadha, beholding those heroes looking like elephants,
with necks broad like those of trees and wide chests, began to wonder
much. Those bull among men, passing through three gates that were crowded
with men, proudly and cheerfully approached the king. And Jarasandha
rising up in haste received them with water to wash their feet with, and
honey and the other ingredients of the Arghya--with gifts of kine, and
with other forms of respect. The great king addressing them said,--'Ye
are welcome'! And, O Janamejaya, both Partha and Bhima remained silent at
this. And addressing the monarch Krishna said,--'O king of kings these
two are now in the observance of a vow. Therefore they will not speak.
Silent they will remain till midnight After that hour they will speak
with thee!' The king then quartering his guests in the sacrificial
apartments retired into his private chambers. And when midnight arrived,
the monarch arrived at the place where his guests attired as Brahmanas
were. For, O King, that ever victorious monarch observed this vow which
was known throughout the Worlds that as soon as he should hear of the
arrival of Snataka Brahmanas at his place, should it be even at midnight,
he would immediately, O Bharata, come out and grant them an audience.
Beholding the strange attire of his guests that best of kings wondered
much. For all that, however, he waited on them respectfully. Those bulls
among men, those slayers of all foes, on the other hand, O thou best of
the Bharata race, beholding king Jarasandha, said,--'Let salvation be
attained by thee, O king, without difficulty.' And, O tiger among kings,
having said this unto the monarch, they stood looking at each other. And,
O king of kings, Jarasandha then said unto those sons of Pandu and him of
the Yadu race, all disguised as Brahmanas--'Take your seats.' And those
bulls among men sat themselves down, and like the three priests of a
great sacrifice blazed forth in their beauty. And king Jarasandha, O thou
of the Kuru race, firmly devoted to truth, censuring the disguised
guests, said unto them,--'It is well known to me that in the whole world
Brahmanas in the observance of Snataka vow never deck their persons with
garlands and fragrant paste unseasonably. Who are ye, therefore, thus
decked with flowers, and with hands bearing the marks of the bow-string?
Attired in coloured robes and decked unseasonably with flowers and paste,
ye give me to understand that ye are Brahmanas, although ye bear
Kshatriya energy. Tell me truly who ye are. Truth decks even kings.
Breaking down the peak of the Chaityaka hill, why have ye, in disguise,
entered (the city) by an improper gate without fear of the royal wrath?
The energy of a Brahmana dwelleth in his speech, (not in act). This your
feat is not suited to the order to which ye profess to belong. Tell us
therefore, the end ye have in view. Arrived here by such an improper way,
why accept ye not the worship I offer? What is your motive for coming to
me? Thus addressed by the king, the high-souled Krishna, well-skilled in
speech, thus replied unto the monarch in a calm and grave voice.
"Krishna said,--'O king, know us for Snataka Brahmanas. Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas are all, O monarch, competent to observe the vow
of Snataka. This vow, besides, hath (many) especial and general rules. A
Kshatriya observing this vow with especial rules always achieve
prosperity. Therefore, have we decked ourselves with flowers. Kshatriyas
again, O king, exhibit their energy by their arms and not in speech. It
is, therefore, O son of Vrihadratha, that the speeches uttered by a
Kshatriya are never audacious. O monarch, the creator hath planted his
own energy in the aim of the Kshatriya. If thou wishest to behold it,
thou shalt certainly behold it today. These are the rules of the
ordinance, viz., that an enemy's abode should be entered through a wrong
gate and a friend's abode through the right one. And know, O monarch,
that this also is our eternal vow that having entered the foe's abode for
the accomplishment of our purpose, we accept not the worship offered to
us!"
