SECTION XVI
"Yudhishthira said,--'Desirous of the imperial dignity but acting from
selfish motives and relying upon courage alone, how, O Krishna, can I
despatch ye (unto Jarasandha)? Both Bhima and Arjuna, I regard as my
eyes, and thee, O Janardana as my mind. How shall I live, deprived of my
eyes and mind. Yama himself cannot vanquish in battle the mighty host of
Jarasandha that is endued, besides, with terrible valour. What valour can
ye exhibit against it. This affair that promises to terminate otherwise
may lead to great mischief. It is my opinion, therefore, that the
proposed task should not be undertaken. Listen, O Krishna, to what I for
one think. O Janardana, desisting from this act seemeth to me to be
beneficial. My heart to-day is afflicted. The Rajasuya appeareth to me
difficult of accomplishment.'"
"Vaisampayana said,--"Arjuna who had obtained that excellent of bows and
that couple of inexhaustible quivers, and that car with that banner, as
also that assembly room, now addressed Yudhishthira and said,--'I have
obtained, O king, a bow and weapons and arrows and energy and allies and
dominions and fame and strength. Those are always difficult of
acquisition, however much they may be desired. Learned men of repute
always praise in good society nobleness of descent. But nothing is equal
to might. Indeed, O monarch, there is nothing I like more than prowess.
Born in a race noted for its valour, one that is without valour is
scarcely worthy of regard. One, however, possessed of valour, that is
born in a race not noted for it, is much superior to the former. He, O
king, is a Kshatriya in every thing who increaseth his fame and
possessions by the subjugation of his enemies. And he that is possessed
of valour, though destitute of all (other) merits, will vanquish his
foes. One, however, that is destitute of valour, though possessed of
every (other) merit, can scarcely accomplish anything. Every merit exists
by the side of valour in an incipient state. Concentration of attention,
exertion and destiny exist as the three causes of victory. One, however,
that is possessed of valour doth not yet deserve success if he acts
carelessly. It is for this that an enemy endued with strength sometimes
suffers death at the hands of his foes. As meanness overtakes the weak,
so folly sometimes overtakes the strong. A king, therefore, that is
desirous of victory, should avoid both these causes of destruction. If,
for the purpose of our sacrifice, we endeavour to slay Jarasandha and
rescue the kings kept by him for a cruel purpose, there is no higher act
which we could employ ourselves in. If, however, we do not undertake the
task, the world will always think us incompetent. We have certainly the
competence, O king! Why should you, therefore, regard us as incompetent?
Those that have become Munis desirous of achieving tranquillity of souls,
obtain yellow robes with ease. So if we vanquish the foe, the imperial
dignity will easily be ours. We shall, therefore fight the foe."
