SECTION XIV
(Rajasuyarambha Parva)
"Krishna said,--'O great king, thou art a worthy possessor of all the
qualities essential for the performance of the Rajasuya sacrifice. Thou
knowest everything, O Bharata. I shall, however, still tell thee
something. Those persons in the world that now go by the name of
Kshatriyas are inferior (in everything) to those Kshatriyas that Rama,
the son of Jamadagnya, exterminated.' O lord of the earth, O bull of the
Bharata race, thou knowest what form of rule these Kshatriyas, guided by
the instructions traditionally handed down from generation to generation,
have established amongst their own order, and how far they are competent
to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice. The numerous royal lines and other
ordinary Kshatriyas all represent themselves to be the descendants of
Aila and Ikshwaku. The descendants of Aila, O king, as, indeed, the kings
of Ikshwaku's race, are, know O bull of the Bharata race, each divided
into a hundred separate dynasties. The descendants of Yayati and the
Bhojas are great, both in extent (number) and accomplishments. O king,
these last are to-day scattered all over the earth. And all the
Kshatriyas worship the prosperity of those monarchs. At present, however,
O monarch, king Jarasandha, overcoming that prosperity enjoyed by their
whole order, and overpowering them by his energy hath set himself over
the heads of all these kings. And Jarasandha, enjoying the sovereignty
over the middle portion of the earth (Mathura), resolved to create a
disunion amongst ourselves. O monarch, the king who is the lord paramount
of all kings, and in whom alone the dominion of the universe is centered,
properly deserves to be called an emperor. And, O monarch, king Sisupala
endued with great energy, hath placed himself under his protection and
hath become the generalissimo of his forces. And, O great king, the
mighty Vaka, the king of the Karushas, capable of fighting by putting
forth his powers of illusion, waiteth, upon Jarasandha, as his disciple.
There are two others, Hansa and Dimvaka, of great energy and great soul,
who have sought the shelter of the mighty Jarasandha. There are others
also viz., Dantavakra, Karusha, Karava, Meghavahana, that wait upon
Jarasandha. He also that beareth on his head that gem which is known as
the most wonderful on earth, that king of the Yavanas, who hath chastised
Muru and Naraka, whose power is unlimited, and who ruleth the west like
another Varuna, who is called Bhagadatta, and who is the old friend of
thy father, hath bowed his head before Jarasandha, by speech and
specially by act. In his heart, however, tied as he is by affection to
thee, he regardeth thee as a father regardeth his child. O king, that
lord of the earth who hath his dominions on the west and the south, who
is thy maternal uncle and who is called Purujit, that brave perpetuator
of the Kunti race, that slayer of all foes, is the single king that
regardeth thee from affection. He whom I did not formerly slay, that
wicked wretch amongst the Chedis, who represented himself in this world
as a divine personage and who hath become known also as such, and who
always beareth, from foolishness, the signs that distinguish me that king
of Vanga Pundra and the Kiratas, endowed with great strength, and who is
known on earth by the names of Paundraka and Vasudeva hath also espoused
the side of Jarasandha. And, O king of kings, Bhishmaka, the mighty king
of the Bhojas--the friend of Indra--the slayer of hostile heroes--who
governs a fourth part of the world, who by his learning conquered the
Pandyas and the Kratha-Kausikas, whose brother the brave Akriti was like
Rama, the son of Jamdagni, hath become a servitor to the king of Magadha.
We are his relatives and are, therefore, engaged everyday in doing what
is agreeable unto him. But although we regard him much, still he
regardeth us not and is engaged in doing us ill. And, O king, without
knowing his own strength and the dignity of the race to which he
belongeth, he hath placed himself under Jarasandha's shelter at sight of
the latter's blazing fame alone. And, O exalted one, the eighteen tribes
of the Bhojas, from fear of Jarasandha, have all fled towards the west;
so also have the Surasenas, the Bhadrakas, the Vodhas, the Salwas, the
Patachchavas, the Susthalas, the Mukuttas, and the Kulindas, along with
the Kuntis. And the king of the Salwayana tribe with their brethren and
followers; and the southern Panchalas and the eastern Kosalas have all
fled to the country of the Kuntis. So also the Matsyas and the
Sannyastapadas, overcome with fear, leaving their dominions in the north,
have fled into the southern country. And so all the Panchalas, alarmed at
the power of Jarasandha, have left their own kingdom and fled in all
directions. Some time before, the foolish Kansa, having persecuted the
Yadavas, married two of the daughters of Jarasandha. They are called Asti
and Prapti and are the sister of Sahadeva. Strengthened by such an
alliance, the fool persecuting his relatives gained an ascendency over
them all. But by this conduct he earned great obloquy. The wretch also
began to oppress the old kings of the Bhoja tribe, but they, to protect
themselves from the persecution of their relative, sought our help.
Having bestowed upon Akrura the handsome daughter of Ahuka, with
Sankarshana as my second I did a service to my relatives, for both Kansa
and Sunaman were slain by me assisted by Rama. But after the immediate
cause of fear was removed (by the death of Kansa), Jarasandha, his
father-in-law, took up arms. Ourselves consisting of the eighteen younger
branches of the Yadavas arrived at the conclusion that even if we struck
our enemies continually with excellent weapons capable of taking the
lives of the foes, we should still be unable to do anything unto him even
in three hundred years. He hath two friends that are like unto the
immortals, and in point of strength the foremost of all men endued with
might. They are called Hansa and Dimvaka who are both incapable of being
slain by weapons. The mighty Jarasandha, being united with them, becomes
incapable, I think, of being vanquished by even the three worlds. O thou
foremost of all intelligent men, this is not our opinion alone but all
other kings also are of the same mind. There lived, O monarch, a king of
the name of Hansa, who was slain by Rama (Valadeva) after a battle of
eighteen days. But, O Bharata, hearing people say that Hansa had been
killed, Dimvaka, O king, thought that he could not live without Hansa. He
accordingly jumped into the waters of the Yamuna and killed himself.
Afterwards when Hansa, the subjugator of hostile heroes, heard that
Dimvaka, had killed himself, he went to the Yamuna and jumped into its
waters. Then, O bull of the Bharata race, king Jarasandha, hearing that
both Hansa and Dimvaka had been killed, returned to his kingdom with an
empty heart. After Jarasandha had returned, O slayer of all foes, we were
filled with pleasure and continued to live at Mathura. Then the widow of
Hansa and the daughter of Jarasandha, that handsome woman with eyes like
lotus-petals, grieved at the death of her lord, went unto her father, and
repeatedly urged, O Monarch, the king of Magadha, saying,--O slayer of
all foes, kill thou the slayer of my husband.--Then, O great king,
remembering the conclusion to which we had come of old we became
exceedingly cheerless and fled from Mathura. Dividing our large wealth
into small portions so as to make each portion easily portable, we fled
from fear of Jarasandha, with our cousins and relatives. Reflecting upon
everything, we fled towards the west. There is a delightful town towards
the west called Kusasthali, adorned by the mountains of Raivata. In that
city, O monarch, we took up our abode. We rebuilt its fort and made it so
strong that it has become impregnable even to the Gods. And from within
it even the women might fight the foe, what to speak of the Yadava heroes
without fear of any kind? O slayer of all foes, we are now living in that
city. And, O tiger of the Kuru race, considering the inaccessibility of
that first of mountains and regarding themselves as having already
crossed the fear of Jarasandha, the descendants of Madhu have become
exceedingly glad. Thus, O king, though possessed of strength and energy,
yet from the oppressions of Jarasandha we have been obliged to repair to
the mountains of Gomanta, measuring three Yojanas in length. Within each
yojana have been established one and twenty posts of armed men. And at
intervals of each yojana are hundred gates with arches which are defended
by valourous heroes engaged in guarding them. And innumerable Kshatriyas
invincible in war, belonging to the eighteen younger branches of the
Yadavas, are employed in defending these works. In our race, O king,
there are full eighteen thousand brothers and cousins. Ahuka hath had a
hundred sons, each of whom is almost like a god (in prowess), Charudeshna
with his brother Chakradeva, Satyaki, myself, Valadeva the son of Rohini,
and my son Samva who is equal unto me in battle--these seven, O king are
Atirathas. Besides these, there are others, O king, whom I shall
presently name. They are Kritavarman, Anadhrishti, Samika, Samitinjaya,
Kanka, Sanku and Kunti. These seven are Maharathas. There are also two
sons of Andhakabhoja, and the old king himself. Endued with great energy
these are all heroes, each mighty as the thunderbolt. These Maharathas,
choosing the middle country, are now living amongst the Vrishnis. O thou
best of the Bharata line, thou alone art worthy of being an emperor. It
behoveth thee, O Bharata, to establish thy empire over all the
Kshatriyas. But this is my judgment, O king, that thou wilt not be able
to celebrate the Rajasuya sacrifice as long as the mighty Jarasandha
liveth. By him have been immured in his hillfort numerous monarchs, like
a lion that hath deposited the slain bodies of mighty elephants within a
cave of the king of mountains. O slayer of all enemies, king Jarasandha,
desirous of offering in sacrifice hundred monarchs, adored for his fierce
ascetic penances the illustrious god of gods, the lord of Uma. It is by
this means that the kings of the earth have been vanquished by
Jarasandha. And, O best of monarchs, he hath by that means been able to
fulfil the vow he had made relative to his sacrifice. By defeating the
kings with their troops and bringing all of them as captives into this
city, he had swelled its crowds enormously. We also, O king, from fear of
Jarasandha, at one time had to leave Mathura and fly to the city of
Dwaravati. If, O great king, thou desirest to perform this sacrifice,
strive to release the kings confined by Jarasandha, as also to compass
his death. O son of the Kuru race, otherwise this undertaking of thine
can never be completed. O thou foremost of intelligent men if the
Rajasuya is to be performed by thee, you must do this in this way and not
otherwise. This, O king, is my view (on the matter). Do, O sinless one,
as thou thinkest. Under these circumstances, O king, having reflected
upon everything, taking note of causes, tell us what thou thyself
thinkest proper."
