
SECTION XXV
"Sauti said, 'Then that bird of great strength and energy and capable of
going at will to every place repaired to his mother's side on the other
shore of the great ocean. Thither lived Vinata in affliction, defeated in
wager and put into a state of slavery. Once Kadru calling Vinata who had
prostrated herself before the former, addressed her these words in the
presence of her son, 'O gentle Vinata, there is in the midst of the
ocean, in a remote quarter, a delightful and fair region inhabited by the
Nagas. Bear me thither!' At this that mother of the bird of fair feathers
bore (on her shoulders) the mother of the snakes. And Garuda also,
directed by his mother's words, carried (on his back) the snakes. And
that ranger of the skies born of Vinata began to ascend towards the Sun.
And thereupon the snakes, scorched by the rays of the Sun, swooned away.
And Kadru seeing her sons in that state prayed to Indra, saying, 'I bow
to thee, thou Lord of all the gods! I bow to thee, thou slayer of Vritra!
I bow to thee, thou slayer of Namuchi! O thou of a thousand eyes, consort
of Sachi! By thy showers, be thou the protector of the snakes scorched by
the Sun. O thou best of the deities, thou art our great protector. O
Purandara, thou art able to grant rain in torrents. Thou art Vayu (the
air), the clouds, fire, and the lightning of the skies. Thou art the
propeller of the clouds, and hast been called the great cloud (i.e., that
which will darken the universe at the end of Yuga). Thou art the fierce
and incomparable thunder, and the roaring clouds. Thou art the Creator of
the worlds and their Destroyer. Thou art unconquered. Thou art the light
of all creatures, Aditya, Vibhavasu, and the wonderful elements. Thou art
the ruler of all the gods. Thou art Vishnu. Thou hast a thousand eyes.
Thou art a god, and the final resource. Thou art, O deity, all amrita,
and the most adored Soma. Thou art the moment, the lunar day, the bala
(minute), thou art the kshana (4 minutes). Thou art the lighted
fortnight, and also the dark fortnight. Thou art kala, thou kashtha, and
thou Truti.[1] Thou art the year, the seasons, the months, the nights,
and the days. Thou art the fair Earth with her mountains and forests.
Thou art also the firmament, resplendent with the Sun. Thou art the great
Ocean with heaving billows and abounding with whales, swallowers of
whales, and makaras, and various fishes. Thou art of great renown, always
adored by the wise and by the great Rishis with minds rapt in
contemplation. Thou drinkest, for the good of all creatures, the Soma
juice in sacrifices and the clarified butter offered with sacred
invocation. Thou art always worshipped at sacrifices by Brahmanas moved
by desire of fruit. O thou of incomparable mass of strength, thou art
sung in the Vedas and Vedangas. It is for that reason that learned
Brahmanas bent upon performing sacrifices, study the Vedas with every
care.'"
And so ends the twenty-fifth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.
