SECTION XXX
Vaisampayana said,--"thus also Sahadeva, dismissed with affection by king
Yudhisthira the just, marched towards the southern direction accompanied
by a mighty host. Strong in strength, that mighty prince of the Kuru
race, vanquishing completely at the outset the Surasenas, brought the
king of Matsya under his sway. And the hero then, defeating Dantavakra,
the mighty king of the Adhirajas and making him pay tribute,
re-established him on his throne. The prince then brought under his sway
Sukumara and then king Sumitra, and he next vanquished the other Matsyas
and then the Patacharas. Endued with great intelligence, the Kuru warrior
then conquered soon enough the country of the Nishadas and also the high
hill called Gosringa, and that lord of earth called Srenimat. And
subjugating next the country called Navarashtra, the hero marched against
Kuntibhoja, who with great willingness accepted the sway of the
conquering hero. And marching thence to the banks of the Charmanwati, the
Kuru warrior met the son of king Jamvaka, who had, on account of old
hostilities, been defeated before by Vasudeva. O Bharata, the son of
Jamvaka gave battle to Sahadeva. And Sahadeva defeating the prince
marched towards the south. The mighty warrior then vanquished the Sekas
and others, and exacted tributes from them and also various kinds of gems
and wealth. Allying himself with the vanquished tribes the prince then
marched towards the countries that lay on the banks of the Narmada. And
defeating there in battle the two heroic kings of Avanti, called Vinda
and Anuvinda, supported by a mighty host, the mighty son of the twin gods
exacted much wealth from them. After this the hero marched towards the
town of Bhojakata, and there, O king of unfading glory, a fierce
encounter took place between him and the king of that city for two whole
days. But the son of Madri, vanquishing the invincible Bhismaka, then
defeated in battle the king of Kosala and the ruler of the territories
lying on the banks of the Venwa, as also the Kantarakas and the kings of
the eastern Kosalas. The hero then defeating both the Natakeyas and the
Heramvaks in battle, and subjugating the country of Marudha, reduced
Munjagrama by sheer strength. And the son of Pandu then vanquished the
mighty monarchs of the Nachinas and the Arvukas and the various forest
king of that part of the country. Endued with great strength the hero
then reduced to subjection king Vatadhipa. And defeating in battle the
Pulindas, the hero then marched southward. And the younger brother of
Nakula then fought for one whole day with the king of Pandrya. The
long-armed hero having vanquished that monarch marched further to the
south. And then he beheld the celebrated caves of Kishkindhya and in that
region fought for seven days with the monkey-kings Mainda and Dwivida.
Those illustrious kings however, without being tired an the encounter,
were gratified with Sahadeva. And joyfully addressing the Kuru prince,
they said,--'O tiger among the sons of Pandu, go hence, taking with the
tribute from us all. Let the mission of the king Yudhishthira the just
possessed of great intelligence, be accomplished without hindrance. And
taking jewels and gems from them all, the hero marched towards the city
of Mahishmati, and there that bull of men did battle with king Nila. The
battle that took place between king Nila and the mighty Sahadeva the son
of Pandu, that slayer of hostile heroes, was fierce and terrible. And the
encounter was an exceedingly bloody one, and the life of the hero himself
was exposed to great risk, for the god Agni himself assisted king Nila in
that fight. Then the cars, heroes, elephants, and the soldiers in their
coats of mail of Sahadeva's army all appeared to be on fire. And
beholding this the prince of the Kuru race became exceedingly anxious.
And, O Janamejaya, at sight of this the hero could not resolve upon what
he should do.
Janamejaya said,--O regenerate one, why was it that the god Agni become
hostile in battle unto Sahadeva, who was fighting simply for the
accomplishment of a sacrifice (and therefore, for the gratification of
Agni himself)?
Vaisampayana said,--'It is said, O Janamejaya, that the god Agni while
residing in Mahishmati, earned the reputation of a lover. King Nila had a
daughter who was exceedingly beautiful. She used always to stay near the
sacred fire of her father, causing it to blaze up with vigour. And it so
happened that king Nila's fire, even if fanned, would not blaze up till
agitated by the gentle breath of that girl's fair lips. And it was said
in King Nila's palace and in the house of all his subjects that the god
Agni desired that beautiful girl for his bride. And it so happened that
he was accepted by the girl herself. One day the deity assuming the form
of a Brahmana, was happily enjoying the society of the fair one, when he
was discovered by the king. And the virtuous king thereupon ordered the
Brahmana to be punished according to law. At this the illustrious deity
flamed up in wrath. And beholding this, the king wondered much and bent
his head low on the ground. And after some time the king bowing low
bestowed the daughter of his upon the god Agni, disguised as a Brahmana.
And the god Vibhabasu (Agni) accepting that fair-browed daughter of king
Nila, became gracious unto that monarch. And Agni, the illustrious
gratifier of all desires also asked the monarch to beg a boon of him. And
the king begged that his troops might never be struck with panic while
engaged in battle. And from that time, O king, those monarchs who from
ignorance of this, desire to subjugate king Nila's city, are consumed by
Hutasana (Agni). And from that time, O perpetuator of the Kuru race, the
girls of the city of Mahishmati became rather unacceptable to others (as
wives). And Agni by his boon granted them sexual liberty, so that the
women of that town always roam about at will, each unbound to a
particular husband. And, O bull of the Bharata race, from that time the
monarchs (of other countries) forsake this city for fear of Agni. And the
virtuous Sahadeva, beholding his troops afflicted with fear and
surrounded by flames of fire, himself stood there immovable as a
mountain. And purifying himself and touching water, the hero (Sahadeva)
then addressed Agni, the god that sanctifieth everything, in these
words,--
'I bow unto thee, O thou whose track is always marked with smoke. These
my exertions are all for thee. O thou sanctifier of all, thou art the
mouth of the gods and thou art Sacrifice personified. Thou art called
Pavaka because thou sanctifiest everything, and thou art Havyavahana,
because thou carriest the clarified butter that is poured on thee. The
Veda have sprung for ministering unto thee, and, therefore, thou art
called Jataveda. Chief of the gods as thou art, thou art called
Chitrabhanu, Anala, Vibhavasu, Hutasana, Jvalana, Sikhi, Vaiswanara,
Pingesa, Plavanga, Bhuritejah. Thou art he from whom Kumara (Kartikeya)
had his origin; thou art holy; thou art called Rudragarva and
Hiranyakrit. Let thee, O Agni, grant me energy, let Vayu grant me life,
let Earth grant me nourishment and strength, and let Water grant me
prosperity. O Agni, thou who art the first cause of the waters, thou who
art of great purity, thou for ministering unto whom the Vedas have
sprung, thou who art the foremost of the deities, thou who art their
mouth, O purify me by thy truth. Rishis and Brahmanas, Deities and Asuras
pour clarified butter every day, according to the ordinance into thee
during sacrifices. Let the rays of truth emanating from thee, while thou
exhibitest thyself in those sacrifices, purify me. Smoke-bannered as thou
art and possessed of flames, thou great purifier from all sins born of
Vayu and ever present as thou art in all creatures, O purify me by the
rays of thy truth. Having cleansed myself thus cheerfully, O exalted one,
do I pray unto thee. O Agni, grant me now contentment and prosperity, and
knowledge and gladness.
Vaisampayana continued.--'He that will pour clarified butter into Agni
reciting these mantras, will ever be blessed with prosperity, and having
his soul under complete control will also be cleansed from all his sins.
"Sahadeva, addressing Agni again, said,--'O carrier of the sacrificial
libations, it behoveth thee not to obstruct a sacrifice!' Having said
this, that tiger among men--the son of Madri--spreading some kusa grass
on earth sat down in expectation of the (approaching) fire and in front
of those terrified and anxious troops of his. And Agni, too, like the
ocean that never transgresseth its continents, did not pass over his
head. On the other hand approaching Sahadeva quietly and addressing that
prince of the Kuru race, Agni that god of men gave him every assurance
and said,--'O thou of the Kuru race, rise up from this posture. O rise
up, I was only trying thee. I know all thy purpose, as also those of the
son of Dharma (Yudhisthira). But, O best of the Bharata race, as long as
there is a descendant of king Nila's line, so long should this town be
protected by me. I will, however O son of Pandu, gratify the desires of
thy heart. And at these words of Agni, O bull of the Bharata race, the
son of Madri rose up with a cheerful heart, and joining his hands and
bending his head worshipped that god of fire, sanctifier of all beings.
And at last, after Agni had disappeared, king Nila came there, and at the
command of that deity, worshipped with due rites Sahadeva, that tiger
among men--that master of battle. And Sahadeva accepted that worship and
made him pay tribute. And having brought king Nila under his sway thus,
the victorious son of Madri then went further towards the south. The
long-armed hero then brought the king of Tripura of immeasurable energy
under his sway. And next turning his forces against the Paurava kingdom,
he vanquished and reduced to subjection the monarch thereof. And the
prince, after this, with great efforts brought Akriti, the king of
Saurashtra and preceptor of the Kausikas under his sway. The virtuous
prince, while staying in the kingdom of Saurashtra sent an ambassador
unto king Rukmin of Bhishmaka within the territories of Bhojakata, who,
rich in possessions and intelligence, was the friend of Indra himself.
And the monarch along with his son, remembering their relationship with
Krishna, cheerfully accepted, O king, the sway of the son of Pandu. And
the master of battle then, having exacted jewels and wealth from king
Rukmin, marched further to the south. And, endued with great energy and
great strength, the hero then, reduced to subjection, Surparaka and
Talakata, and the Dandakas also. The Kuru warrior then vanquished and
brought under his subjection numberless kings of the Mlechchha tribe
living on the sea coast, and the Nishadas and the cannibals and even the
Karnapravarnas, and those tribes also called the Kalamukhas who were a
cross between human beings and Rakshasas, and the whole of the Cole
mountains, and also Surabhipatna, and the island called the Copper
island, and the mountain called Ramaka. The high-souled warrior, having
brought under subjection king Timingila, conquered a wild tribe known by
the name of the Kerakas who were men with one leg. The son of Pandu also
conquered the town of Sanjayanti and the country of the Pashandas and the
Karahatakas by means of his messengers alone, and made all of them pay
tributes to him. The hero brought under his subjection and exacted
tributes from the Paundrayas and the Dravidas along with the Udrakeralas
and the Andhras and the Talavanas, the Kalingas and the Ushtrakarnikas,
and also the delightful city of Atavi and that of the Yavanas. And, O
king of kings, that slayer of all foes, the virtuous and intelligent son
of Madri having arrived at the sea-shore, then despatched with great
assurance messengers unto the illustrious Vibhishana, the grandson of
Pulastya. And the monarch willingly accepted the sway of the son of
Pandu, for that intelligent and exalted king regarded it all as the act
of Time. And he sent unto the son of Pandu diverse kinds of jewels and
gems, and sandal and also wood, and many celestial ornaments, and much
costly apparel, and many valuable pearls. And the intelligent Sahadeva,
accepting them all, returned to his own kingdom.
"Thus it was, O king, that slayer of all foes, having vanquished by
conciliation and war numerous kings and having also made them pay
tribute, came back to his own city. The bull of the Bharata race, having
presented the whole of that wealth unto king Yudhisthira the just
regarded himself, O Janamejaya, as crowned with success and continued to
live happily."
