SECTION XXIX
Vaisampayana said,--that chastiser of all foes then vanquished king
Srenimat of the country of Kumara, and then Vrihadvala, the king of
Kosala. Then the foremost of the sons of Pandu, by performing feats
excelling in fierceness, defeated the virtuous and mighty king
Dirghayaghna of Ayodhya. And the exalted one then subjugated the country
of Gopalakaksha and the northern Kosalas and also the king of Mallas. And
the mighty one, arriving then in the moist region at the foot of the
Himalayas soon brought the whole country under his sway. And that bull of
Bharata race brought under control in this way diverse countries. And
endued with great energy and in strength the foremost of all strong men,
the son of Pandu next conquered the country of Bhallata, as also the
mountain of Suktimanta that was by the side of Bhallata. Then Bhima of
terrible prowess and long arms, vanquishing in battle the unretreating
Suvahu the king of Kasi, brought him under complete sway. Then that bull
among the sons of Pandu overcame in battle, by sheer force, the great
king Kratha reigning in the region lying about Suparsa. Then the hero of
great energy vanquished the Matsya and the powerful Maladas and the
country called Pasubhumi that was without fear or oppression of any kind.
And the long-armed hero then, coming from that land, conquered Madahara,
Mahidara, and the Somadheyas, and turned his steps towards the north. And
the mighty son of Kunti then subjugated, by sheer force, the country
called Vatsabhumi, and the king of the Bhargas, as also the ruler of the
Nishadas and Manimat and numerous other kings. Then Bhima, with scarcely
any degree of exertion and very soon, vanquished the southern Mallas and
the Bhagauanta mountains. And the hero next vanquished, by policy alone,
the Sarmakas and the Varmakas. And that tiger among men then defeated
with comparative ease that lord of earth, Janaka the king of the Videhas.
And the hero then subjugated strategically the Sakas and the barbarians
living in that part of the country. And the son of Pandu, sending forth
expeditions from Videha, conquered the seven kings of the Kiratas living
about the Indra mountain. The mighty hero then, endued with abundant
energy, vanquished in battle the Submas and the Prasuhmas. And winning
them over to his side, the son of Kunti, possessed of great strength,
marched against Magadha. On his way he subjugated the monarchs known by
the names of Danda and Dandadhara, And accompanied by those monarchs, the
son of Pandu marched against Girivraja. After bringing the son of
Jarasandha under his sway by conciliation and making him pay tribute, the
hero then accompanied by the monarchs he had vanquished, marched against
Kansa. And making the earth tremble by means of his troops consisting of
the four kinds of forces, the foremost of the Pandavas then encountered
Karna that slayer of foes. And, O Bharata, having subjugated Karna and
brought him under his sway, the mighty hero then vanquished the powerful
king of the mountainous regions. And the son of Pandu then slew in a
fierce encounter, by the strength of his arms, the mighty king who dwelt
in Madagiri. And the Pandava then, O king, subjugated in battle those
strong and brave heroes of fierce prowess, viz., the heroic and mighty
Vasudeva, the king of Pundra and king Mahaujah who reigned in
Kausika-kachchha, and then attacked the king of Vanga. And having
vanquished Samudrasena and king Chandrasena and Tamralipta, and also the
king of the Karvatas and the ruler of the Suhmas, as also the kings that
dwelt on the sea-shore, that bull among the Bharatas then conquered all
Mlechchha tribes. The mighty son of the wind-god having thus conquered
various countries, and exacting tributes from them all advanced towards
Lohity. And the son of Pandu then made all the Mlechchha kings dwelling
in the marshy regions on the sea-coast, pay tributes and various kinds of
wealth, and sandal wood and aloes, and clothes and gems, and pearls and
blankets and gold and silver and valuable corals. The Mlechchha kings
showered upon the illustrious son of Kunti a thick downpour of wealth
consisting of coins and gems counted by hundreds of millions. Then
returning to Indraprastha, Bhima of terrible prowess offered the whole of
that wealth unto king Yudhisthira the just."
