SECTION XXVIII
Vaisampayana said,--in the meantime, Bhimasena also endued with great
energy, having obtained the assent of Yudhishthira the just marched
towards the eastern direction. And the tiger among the Bharatas,
possessed of great valour and ever increasing the sorrows of his foes,
was accompanied by a mighty host with the full complement of elephants
and horses and cars, well-armed and capable of crushing all hostile
kingdoms. That tiger among men, the son of Pandu, going first into the
great country of the Panchalas, began by various means to conciliate that
tribe. Then that hero, that bull of the Bharata race, within a short
time, vanquished the Gandakas and the Videhas. That exalted one then
subjugated the Dasarnas. There in the country of the Dasarnas, the king
called Sudharman with his bare arms fought a fierce battle with
Bhimasena. And Bhimasena, beholding that feat of the illustrious king,
appointed the mighty Sudharman as the first in command of his forces.
Then Bhima of terrible prowess marched towards the east, causing the
earth itself to tremble with the tread of the mighty host that followed
him. Then that hero who in strength was the foremost of all strong men
defeated in battle Rochamana, the king of Aswamedha, at the head of all
his troops. And the son of Kunti, having vanquished that monarch by
performing feats that excelled in fierceness, subjugated the eastern
region. Then that prince of the Kuru race, endued with great prowess
going into the country of Pulinda in the south, brought Sukumara and the
king Sumitra under his sway. Then, O Janamejaya, that bull in the Bharata
race, at the command of Yudhishthira the just marched against Sisupala of
great energy. The king of Chedi, hearing of the intentions of the son of
Pandu, came out of his city. And that chastiser of all foes then received
the son of Pritha with respect. Then, O king, those bulls of the Chedi
and the Kuru lines, thus met together, enquired after each other's
welfare. Then, O monarch, the king of Chedi offered his kingdom unto
Bhima and said smilingly,--'O sinless one, upon what art thou bent?' And
Bhima thereupon represented unto him the intentions of king Yudhishthira.
And Bhima dwelt there, O king, for thirty nights, duly entertained by
Sisupala. And after this he set out from Chedi with his troops and
vehicles."
