SECTION XXIV
Vaisampayana said,--"thus addressed, Bhima firmly resolved upon slaying
Jarasandha, replied unto Krishna of the Yadu race, saying,--O tiger of
the Yadu race, O Krishna, this wretch that yet stayeth before me with
sufficient strength and bent upon fight, should not be forgiven by me.
Hearing these words of Vrikodara (Bhima), that tiger among men, Krishna,
desiring to encourage that hero to accomplish the death of Jarasandha
without any delay, answered,--'O Bhima, exhibit today upon Jarasandha the
strength thou hast luckily derived, the might thou hast obtained from
(thy father), the god Maruta.' Thus addressed by Krishna, Bhima, that
slayer of foes, holding up in the air the powerful Jarasandha, began to
whirl him on high. And, O bull of the Bharata race, having so whirled him
in the air full hundred times, Bhima pressed his knee against
Jarasandha's backbone and broke his body in twain. And having killed him
thus, the mighty Vrikodara uttered a terrible roar. And the roar of the
Pandava mingling with that death knell of Jarasandha, while he was being
broken on Bhima's knee, caused a loud uproar that struck fear into the
heart of every creature. And all the citizens of Magadha became dumb with
terror and many women were even prematurely delivered. And hearing those
roars, the people of Magadha thought that either the Himavat was tumbling
down or the earth itself was being rent asunder. And those oppressors of
all foes then, leaving the lifeless body of the king at the palace gate
where he lay as one asleep, went out of the town. And Krishna, causing
Jarasandha's car furnished with an excellent flagstaff to be made ready
and making the brothers (Bhima and Arjuna) ride in it, went in and
released his (imprisoned) relatives. And those kings rescued from
terrible fate, rich in the possession of jewels, approaching Krishna made
presents unto him of jewels and gems. And having vanquished his foe,
Krishna furnished with weapons and unwounded and accompanied by the kings
(he had released), came out of Girivraja riding in that celestial car (of
Jarasandha). And he also who could wield the bow with both hands
(Arjuna), who was incapable of being vanquished by any of the monarchs on
earth, who was exceedingly handsome in person and well-skilled in the
destruction of the foe, accompanied by the possessor of great strength
(Bhima), came out of that tort with Krishna driving the car whereon he
rode. And that best of cars, incapable of being vanquished by any king,
ridden in by those warriors Bhima and Arjuna, and driven by Krishna,
looked exceedingly handsome. Indeed, it was upon that car that Indra and
Vishnu had fought of old in the battle (with the Asuras) in which Taraka
(the wife of Vrihaspati) had become the immediate cause of much
slaughter. And riding upon that car Krishna now came out of the
hill-fort. Possessed of the splendour of heated gold, and decked with
rows of jingling bells and furnished with wheels whose clatter was like
the roar of clouds, and ever victorious in battle, and always
slaughtering the foe against whom it was driven, it was that very car
riding upon which Indra had slain ninety-nine Asuras of old. And those
bulls among men (the three cousins) having obtained that car became
exceedingly glad. The people of Magadha, behold the long-armed Krishna
along with the two brothers, seated in that car (of Jarasandha) wondered
much. O Bharata, that car, whereunto were yoked celestial horses and
which possessed the speed of the wind, thus ridden upon by Krishna,
looked exceedingly beautiful. And upon that best of cars was a flag-staff
without being visibly attached thereto, and which was the product of
celestial skill. And the handsome flag-staff, possessed of the splendour
of the rainbow, could be seen from the distance of a yojana. And Krishna
while, coming out, thought of Garuda. And Garuda, thought of by his
master, came thither in no time, like a tree of vast proportions standing
in a village worshipped by all. Garuda of immense weight of body and
living upon snakes sat upon that excellent car along with the numberless
open-mouthed and frightfully-roaring creatures on its flag-staff. And
thereupon that best of cars became still more dazzling with its splendour
and was as incapable of being looked at by created being as the midday
sun surrounded by a thousand rays. And, O king, such was that best of
flag-staffs of celestial make that it never struck against any tree nor
could any weapon injure it at all even though visible to men's eyes. And
Achyuta, that tiger among men, riding with the two sons of Pandu upon
that celestial car, the clatter of whose wheels was like the roar of the
clouds, came out of Girivraja. The car upon which Krishna rode had been
obtained by king Vasu from Vasava, and from Vasu by Vrihadratha, and from
the latter in due course by king Jarasandha. And he of long arms and eyes
like lotus-petals and possessed of illustrious reputation, coming out of
Girivraja, stopped (for some time) on a level plain outside the town.
And, O king, all the citizens then, with the Brahmanas at their head,
hastened thither to adore him with due religious rites. And the kings who
had been released from confinement worshipped the slayer of Madhu with
reverence, and addressing him with eulogies said,--O thou of long arms,
thou hast to-day rescued us, sunk in the deep mire of sorrow in the hand
of Jarasandha. Such an act of virtue by thee, O son of Devaki, assisted
by the might of Bhima and Arjuna, is most extraordinary. O Vishnu,
languishing as we all were in the terrible hill-fort of Jarasandha, it
was verily from sheer good fortune alone that thou hast rescued us, O son
of the Yadu race, and achieved thereby a remarkable reputation. O tiger
among men, we bow down to thee. O, command us what we shall do. However
difficult of accomplishment, thy command being made known to us, O lord
(Krishna), it will at once be accomplished by us. Thus addressed by the
monarchs, the high-souled Hrishikesa gave them every assurance and
said,--'Yudhishthira is desirous of performing the sacrifice of Rajasuya.
That monarch, ever guided by virtue, is solicitous of acquiring the
imperial dignity. Having known this from me assist ye him in his
endeavours. Then, O king, all those monarchs with joyous hearts accepted
the words of Krishna, saying,--'So be it! And saying this, those lords of
earth made presents of jewels unto him of the Dasarha race. And Govinda,
moved by kindness towards them, took a portion of those presents,
"Then the son of Jarasandha, the high-souled Sahadeva, accompanied by his
relatives and the principal officers of state, and with his priest in
front came thither. And the prince, bending himself low and making large
presents of jewels and precious stones, worshipped Vasudeva, that god
among men. Then that best of men, Krishna, giving every assurance unto
the prince afflicted with fear, accepted those presents of his of great
value. And Krishna joyfully installed the prince there and then in the
sovereignty of Magadha. And the strong-armed and illustrious son of
Jarasandha, thus installed on the throne by those most exalted of men and
having obtained the friendship of Krishna and treated with respect and
kindness by the two sons of Pritha, re-entered the city of his father.
And that bull amongst men, Krishna, accompanied by the sons of Pritha and
graced with great good fortune, left the city of Magadha, laden with
numerous jewels. Accompanied by the two sons of Pandu, Achyuta (Krishna)
arrived at Indraprastha, and approaching Yudhishthira joyfully addressing
that monarch said,--'O best of kings, from good fortune, the mighty
Jarasandha hath been slain by Bhima, and the kings confined (at
Girivraja) have been all set free. From good fortune also, these two,
Bhima and Dhananjaya, are well and arrived, O Bharata, it their own city
unwounded. Then Yudhishthira worshipped Krishna as he deserved and
embraced Bhima and Arjuna in joy. And the monarch who had no enemy,
having obtained victory through the agency of his brothers in consequence
of the death of Jarasandha, gave himself up to pleasure and merriment
with all his brothers. And the oldest son of Pandu (Yudhisthira) together
with his brothers approached the kings who had come to Indraprastha and
entertaining and worshipping them, each according to his age, dismissed
them all. Commanded by Yudhishthira those kings with joyful hearts, set
out for their respective countries without loss of time, riding upon
excellent vehicles. Thus, O king, did that tiger among men. Janardana of
great intelligence, caused his foe Jarasandha to be slain through the
instrumentality of the Pandavas. And, O Bharata, that chastiser of all
foes having thus caused Jarasandha to be slain, took leave of
Yudhishthira and Pritha, and Draupadi and Subhadra, and Bhimasena and
Arjuna and the twins Nakula and Sahadeva. After taking leave of
Dhananjaya also, he set out for his own city (of Dwarka), riding upon
that best of cars of celestial make, possessed of the speed of the mind
and given unto him by Yudhishthira, filling the ten points of the horizon
with the deep rattle of its wheels. And, O bull of the Bharata race, just
as Krishna was on the point of setting out, the Pandavas with
Yudhishthira at their head walked round that tiger among men who was
never fatigued with exertion.'
"And after the illustrious Krishna, the son of Devaki, had departed (from
Indraprastha) having acquired that great victory and having also
dispelled the fears of the kings, that feat, O Bharata, swelled the fame
of the Pandavas. And, O king, the Pandavas passed their days, continuing
to gladden the heart of Draupadi. And at that time, whatever was proper
and consistent with virtue, pleasure, and profit, continued to be
properly executed by king Yudhishthira in the exercise of his duties of
protecting his subjects."
