SECTION XXXIV
Vaisampayana said,--"then, O king, Yudhishthira, having approached and
worshipped his grandfather and his preceptor, addressed Bhishma and Drona
and Kripa and the son of Drona and Duryyodhana and Vivingsati, and
said,--'Help me ye all in the mater of this sacrifice. This large
treasure that is here is yours. Consult ye with one another and guide me
as ye desire.
"The eldest of the sons of Pandu, who had been installed at the
sacrifice, having said this unto all, appointed every one of them to
suitable offices. He appointed Dussasana to superintend the department of
food and other enjoyable articles. Aswatthama was asked to attend on the
Brahmanas. Sanjaya was appointed to offer return-worship unto the kings.
Bhishma and Drona, both endued with great intelligence, were appointed to
see what was done and what was left undone. And the king appointed Kripa
to look after the diamonds and gold and the pearls and gems, as also
after the distribution of gifts to Brahmanas. And so other tigers among
men were appointed to similar offices. Valhika and Dhritarashtra and
Somadatta and Jayadratha, brought thither by Nakula, went about, enjoying
themselves as lords of the sacrifice. Vidura otherwise called Kshatta,
conversant with every rule of morality, became the disburser. Duryyodhana
became the receiver of the tributes that were brought by the kings.
Krishna who was himself the centre of all worlds and round whom moved
every creature, desirous of acquiring excellent fruits, was engaged at
his own will in washing the feet of the Brahmanas.
"And desirous of beholding that sacrificial mansion, as also king
Yudhishthira the just, none came there with tribute less than a thousand
(in number, weight or measure). Everyone honoured the king Yudhishthira
the just with large presents of jewels. And each of the kings made a
present of his wealth, flattering himself with the proud belief that the
jewels he gave would enable the Kuru king Yudhisthira to complete his
sacrifice. And, O monarch, the sacrificial compound of the illustrious
son of Kunti looked extremely handsome--with the multitude of palaces
built so as to last for ever and crowded with guards and warriors. These
were so high that their tops touched the cars of the gods that came to
behold that sacrifice; as also with the cars themselves of the
celestials, and with the dwelling of the Brahmanas and the mansions made
there for the kings resembling the cars of the celestials and adorned
with gems and filled with every kind of wealth, and lastly with crowds of
the kings that came there all endued with beauty and wealth. Yudhisthira,
as though vying with Varuna himself in wealth, commenced the sacrifice
(of Rajasuya) distinguished by six fires and large gifts to Brahmanas.
The King gratified everybody with presents of great value and indeed with
every kind of object that one could desire. With abundance of rice and of
every kind of food, as also with a mass of jewels brought as tribute,
that vast concourse consisted of persons every one of whom was fed to the
full. The gods also were gratified at the sacrifice by the Ida, clarified
butter, Homa and libations poured by the great Rishis versed in mantras
and pronunciation. Like the gods, the Brahmanas also were gratified with
the sacrificial gifts and food and great wealth. And all the other orders
of men also were gratified at that sacrifice and filled with joy."
