SECTION XLIII
"Bhishma said,--The will under which the ruler of Chedi summoneth thee to
fight though thou art of strength that knoweth no deterioration, is
scarcely his own intention. Assuredly, this is the purpose of Krishna
himself, the lord of the universe. O Bhima, what king is there on earth
that would dare abuse me thus, as this wretch of his race, already
possessed by Death, hath done to-day? This mighty-armed one is, without
doubt, a portion of Hari's energy. And surely, the Lord desireth to take
back unto himself that energy of his own. In consequence of this, O tiger
of the Kuru race, this tiger-like king of Chedi, so wicked of heart,
roareth in such a way caring little for us all."
"Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Bhishma, the king of
Chedi could bear no more, He then replied in rage unto Bhishma in these
words.--
'Let our foes, O Bhishma, be endued with that prowess which this Kesava
hath, whom thou like a professional chanter of hymns praisest, rising
repeatedly from thy seat. If thy mind, O Bhishma, delighteth so in
praising others, then praise thou these kings, leaving off Krishna.
Praise thou this excellent of kings, Darada, the ruler of Valhika, who
rent this earth as soon as he was born. Praise thou, O Bhishma, this
Karna, the ruler of the territories of Anga and Vanga, who is equal in
strength unto him of a thousand eyes, who draweth a large bow, who endued
with mighty arms owneth celestial ear-rings of heavenly make with which
he was born and this coat of mail possessing the splendour of the rising
sun, who vanquished in a wrestling encounter the invincible Jarasandha
equal unto Vasava himself, and who tore and mangled that monarch. O
Bhishma, praise Drona and Aswatthaman, who both father and son, are
mighty warriors, worthy of praise, and the best of Brahmanas, and either
of whom, O Bhishma, if enraged could annihilate this earth with its
mobile and immobile creatures, as I believe. I do not behold, O Bhishma,
the king that is equal in battle unto Drona or Aswatthaman. Why wishest
thou not to praise them? Passing over Duryyodhana, that mighty-armed king
of kings, who is unequalled in whole earth girt with her seas and king
Jayadratha accomplished in weapons and endued with great prowess, and
Druma the preceptor of the Kimpurushas and celebrated over the world for
prowess, and Saradwata's son, old Kripa, the preceptor of the Bharata
princes and endued with great energy, why dost thou praise Kesava?
Passing over that foremost of bowmen--that excellent of kings, Rukmin of
great energy, why praisest thou Kesava? Passing over Bhishmaka of
abundant energy, and king Dantavakra, and Bhagadatta known for his
innumerable sacrificial stakes, and Jayatsena the king of the Magadha,
and Virata and Drupada, and Sakuni and Vrihadvala, and Vinda and Anuvinda
of Avant Pandya, Sweta Uttama Sankhya of great prosperity, the proud
Vrishasena, the powerful Ekalavya, and the great charioteer Kalinga of
abundant energy, why dost thou praise Kesava? And, O Bhishma, if thy mind
is always inclined to sing the praises of others, why dost thou not
praise Salya and other rulers of the earth? O king, what can be done by
me when (it seemeth) thou hast not heard anything before from virtuous
old men giving lessons in morality? Hast thou never heard, O Bhishma,
that reproach and glorification, both of self and others, are not
practices of those that are respectable? There is no one that approveth
thy conduct, O Bhishma, in unceasingly praising with devotion, from
ignorance alone, Kesava so unworthy of praise. How dost thou, from thy
wish alone, establish the whole universe in the servitor and cowherd of
Bhoja (Kansa)? Perhaps, O Bharata, this thy inclination is not
conformable to thy true nature, like to what may be in the bird Bhulinga,
as hath already been said by me. There is a bird called Bhulinga living
on the other side of the Himavat. O Bhishma, that bird ever uttereth
words of adverse import. Never do anything rash,--this is what she always
sayeth, but never understandeth that she herself always acteth very
rashly. Possessed of little intelligence that bird picketh from the
lion's mouth the pieces of flesh sticking between the teeth, and at a
time when the lion is employed in eating. Assuredly, O Bhishma, that bird
liveth at the pleasure of the lion. O sinful wretch, thou always speakest
like that bird. And assuredly, O Bhishma, thou art alive at the pleasure
only of these kings. Employed in acts contrary to the opinions of all,
there is none else like thee!"
"Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these harsh words of the ruler of
Chedi, Bhishma, O king, said in the hearing of the king of Chedi,--'Truly
am I alive at the pleasure of these rulers of earth. But I do regard
these kings as not equal to even a straw.' As soon as these words were
spoken by Bhishma, the kings became inflamed with wrath. And the down of
some amongst them stood erect and some began to reprove Bhishma. And
hearing those words of Bhishma, some amongst them, that were wielders of
large bows exclaimed, 'This wretched Bhishma, though old, is exceedingly
boastful. He deserveth not our pardon. Therefore, ye kings, incensed with
rage as this Bhishma is, it is well that this wretch were slain like an
animal, or, mustering together, let us burn him in a fire of grass or
straw.' Hearing these words of the monarchs, Bhishma the grand-sire of
the Kurus, endued with great intelligence, addressing those lords of
earth, said,--'I do not see the end of our speeches, for words may be
answered with words. Therefore, ye lords of earth, listen ye all unto
what I say. Whether I be slain like an animal or burnt in a fire of grass
and straw, thus do I distinctly place my foot on the heads of ye all.
Here is Govinda, that knoweth no deterioration. Him have we worshipped.
Let him who wisheth for speedy death, summon to battle Madhava of dark
hue and the wielder of the discus and the mace; and falling enter into
and mingle with the body of this god!"
