SECTION XLI
"Sisupala said,--"That mighty king Jarasandha who desired not to fight
with Krishna, saying 'He is a slave,' was worthy of my greatest esteem.
Who will regard as praiseworthy the act which was done by Kesava, as also
by Bhima and Arjuna, in the matter of Jarasandha's death? Entering by an
improper gate, disguised as a Brahmana, thus Krishna observed the
strength of king Jarasandha. And when that monarch offered at first unto
this wretch water to wash his feet, it was then that he denied his
Brahmanahood from seeming motives of virtue. And when Jarasandha, O thou
of the Kuru race, asked Krishna and Bhima and Dhananjaya to eat, it was
this Krishna that refused that monarch's request. If this one is the lord
of the universe, as this fool representeth him to be, why doth he not
regard himself as a Brahmana? This, however, surpriseth me greatly that
though thou leadest the Pandavas away from the path of the wise, they yet
regard thee as honest. Or, perhaps, this is scarcely a matter of surprise
in respect of those that have thee, O Bharata, womanish in disposition
and bent down with age, for their counsellor in everything."
"Vaisampayana continued,--Hearing these words of Sisupala, harsh both in
import and sound, that foremost of mighty men, Bhimasena endued with
energy became angry. And his eyes, naturally large and expanding and like
unto lotus leaves became still more extended and red as copper under the
influence of that rage. And the assembled monarchs beheld on his forehead
three lines of wrinkles like the Ganga of treble currents on the
treble-peaked mountain. When Bhimasena began to grind his teeth in rage,
the monarchs beheld his face resembling that of Death himself, at the end
of the Yuga, prepared to swallow every creature. And as the hero endued
with great energy of mind was about to leap up impetuously, the
mighty-armed Bhishma caught him like Mahadeva seizing Mahasena (the
celestial generalissimo). And, O Bharata, Bhima's wrath was soon appeased
by Bhishma, the grand-sire of the Kurus, with various kinds of counsel.
And Bhima, that chastiser of foes, could not disobey Bhishma's words,
like the ocean that never transgresseth (even when swollen with the
waters of the rainy season) its continents. But, O king, even though
Bhima was angry, the brave Sisupala depending on his own manhood, did not
tremble in fear. And though Bhima was leaping up impetuously every
moment, Sisupala bestowed not a single thought on him, like a lion that
recks not a little animal in rage. The powerful king of Chedi, beholding
Bhima of terrible prowess in such rage, laughingly said,--'Release him, O
Bhishma! Let all the monarchs behold him scorched by my prowess like an
insect in fire.' Hearing these words of the ruler of the Chedis, Bhishma,
that foremost of the Kurus and chief of all intelligent men, spoke unto
Bhima these words."
