SECTION XXXVII
"Vaisampayana said,--Then the king Yudhishthira hastily ran after
Sisupala and spoke unto him sweetly and in a conciliating tone the
following words,--'O lord of earth, what thou hast said is scarcely
proper for thee. O king, it is highly sinful and needlessly cruel. Insult
not Bhishma, O king, by saying that he doth not know what virtue is.
Behold, these many kings, older than thou art, all approve of the worship
offered unto Krishna. It behoveth thee to bear it patiently like them. O
ruler of Chedi, Bhishma knoweth Krishna truly. Thou knowest him not so
well as this one of the Kuru race.'"
"Bhishma also, after this, said,--He that approveth not the worship
offered unto Krishna, the oldest one in the universe, deserveth neither
soft words nor conciliation. The chief of warriors of the Kshatriya rare
who having overcome a Kshatriya in battle and brought him under his
power, setteth him free, becometh the guru (preceptor or master) of the
vanquished one. I do not behold in this assembly of kings even one ruler
of men who hath not been vanquished in battle by the energy of this son
of the Satwata race. This one (meaning Krishna) here, of undefiled glory,
deserveth to be worshipped not by ourselves alone, but being of mighty
arms, he deserveth to be worshipped by the three worlds also. Innumerable
warriors among Kshatriyas have been vanquished in battle by Krishna. The
whole universe without limit is established in him of the Vrishni race.
Therefore do we worship Krishna amongst the best and the oldest, and not
others. It behoveth thee not to say so. Let thy understanding be never
so. I have, O king, waited upon many persons that are old in knowledge. I
have heard from all those wise men, while talking; of the numerous
much-regarded attributes of the accomplished Sauri. I have also heard
many times all the acts recited by people that Krishna of great
intelligence hath performed since his birth. And, O king of Chedi, we do
not from caprice, or keeping in view our relationship or the benefits he
may confer on us, worship Janarddana who is worshipped by the good on
earth and who is the source of the happiness of every creature. We have
offered unto him the first worship because of his fame, his heroism, his
success. There is none here of even tender years whom we have not taken
into consideration. Passing over many persons that are foremost for their
virtues, we have regarded Hari as deserving of the first worship. Amongst
the Brahmanas one that is superior in knowledge, amongst the Kshatriyas
one that is superior in strength, amongst the Vaisyas one that is
superior in possessions and wealth, and amongst the Sudras one that is
superior in years, deserveth to be worshipped. In the matter of the
worship offered unto Govinda, there are two reason, viz., knowledge of
the Vedas and their branches, and also excess of strength. Who else is
there in the world of men save Kesava that is so distinguished? Indeed,
liberality, cleverness, knowledge of the Vedas, bravery, modesty,
achievements, excellent intelligence, humility, beauty, firmness,
contentment and prosperity--all dwell for ever in Achyuta. Therefore, ye
kings; it behoveth ye to approve of the worship that hath been offered
unto Krishna who is of great accomplishments, who as the preceptor, the
father, the guru, is worthy of the Arghya and deserving of (everybody's)
worship. Hrishikesa is the sacrificial priest, the guru, worthy of being
solicited to accept one's daughter in marriage, the Snataka, the king,
the friend: therefore hath Achyuta been worshipped by us. Krishna is the
origin of the universe and that in which the universe is to dissolve.
Indeed, this universe of mobile and immobile creatures hath sprung into
existence from Krishna only. He is the unmanifest primal cause (Avyakta
Prakriti), the creator, the eternal, and beyond the ken of all creatures.
Therefore doth he of unfading glory deserve highest worship. The
intellect, the seat of sensibility, the five elements, air, heat, water,
ether, earth, and the four species of beings (oviparous, viviparous, born
of filthy damp and vegetal) are all established in Krishna. The sun, the
moon, the constellations, the planets, all the principal directions, the
intermediate directions, are all established in Krishna. As the Agnihotra
is the foremost among all Vedic sacrifices, as the Gayatri is the
foremost among metres, as the king is the foremost among men, as the
ocean is the foremost among all rivers, as the moon is the foremost among
all constellations, as the sun is the foremost among all luminous bodies,
as the Meru is the foremost among all mountains, as Garuda is the
foremost among all birds, so as long as the upward, downward, and sideway
course of the universe lasteth, Kesava is the foremost in all the worlds
including the regions of the celestials. This Sisupala is a mere boy and
hence he knoweth not Krishna, and ever and everywhere speaketh of Krishna
thus. This ruler of Chedi will never see virtue in that light in which
one that is desirous of acquiring high merit will see it. Who is there
among the old and the young or among these illustrious lords of earth
that doth not regard Krishna as deserving of worship or that doth not
worship Krishna? If Sisupala regardeth this worship as undeserved, it
behoveth him to do what is proper in this matter.'"
