SECTION XXXVIII
"Vaisampayana said,--The mighty Bhishma ceased, having said this.
Sahadeva then answered (Sisupala) in words of grave import, saying,--'If
amongst ye there be any king that cannot bear to see Kesava of dark hue,
the slayer of Kesi, the possessor of immeasurable energy, worshipped by
me, this my foot is placed on the heads of all mighty ones (like him).
When I say this, let that one give me an adequate reply. And let those
kings that possess intelligence approve the worship of Krishna who is the
preceptor, the father, the guru, and deserveth the Arghya and the worship
(already offered unto him).'
"When Sahadeva thus showed his foot, no one among those intelligent and
wise and proud and mighty monarchs said anything. And a shower of flowers
fell on Sahadeva's head, and an incorporeal voice said--'Excellent,
excellent.' Then Narada clad in black deer-skin, speaking of both the
future and the past, that dispeller of all doubts, fully acquainted with
all the worlds, said in the midst of innumerable creatures, these words
of the clearest import,--'Those men that will not worship the lotus-eyed
Krishna should be regarded as dead though moving, and should never be
talked to on any occasion.'"
"Vaisampayana continued,--Then that god among men, Sahadeva cognisant of
the distinction between a Brahmana and a Kshatriya, having worshipped
those that deserved worship, completed that ceremony. But upon Krishna
having received the first worship, Sunitha (Sisupala) that mower of
foes--with eyes red as copper from anger, addressed those rulers of men
and said,--'When I am here to head ye all, what are ye thinking of now?
Arrayed let us stand in battle against the assembled Vrishnis and the
Pandavas?' And the bull of the Chedis, having thus stirred the kings up,
began to consult with them how to obstruct the completion of the
sacrifice. All the invited monarchs who had come to the sacrifice, with
Sunitha as their chief, looked angry and their faces became pale. They
all said, 'We must so act that the final sacrificial rite performed by
Yudhishthira and the worship of Krishna may not be regarded as having
been acquiesced in by us. And impelled by a belief in their power and
great assurance, the kings, deprived of reason through anger, began to
say this. And being moved by self-confidence and smarting under the
insult offered unto them, the monarchs repeatedly exclaimed thus. Though
their friends sought to appease them, their faces glowed with anger like
those of roaring lions driven away from their preys. Krishna then
understood that the vast sea of monarchs with its countless waves of
troops was preparing for a terrific rush."
