SECTION XLVIII
Vaisampayana said--"O king, impressed with the great Rajasuya sacrifice
of king Yudhishthira, Sakuni, the son of Suvala, having learnt before the
intentions of Duryodhana, while accompanying him in the way from the
assembly house, and desirous of saying what was agreeable to him,
approached Dhritarashtra endued with great wisdom, and finding the
monarch deprived of his eye seated (in his throne), told him these
words,--'Know, O great king, O bull of the Bharata race, that Duryodhana,
having lost colour, hath become pale and emaciated and depressed and a
prey to anxiety. Why dost thou not, after due enquiry, ascertain the
grief that is in the heart of thy eldest son, the grief that is caused by
the foe?'
"Dhritarashtra said,--'Duryodhana, what is the reason of thy great
affliction. O son of the Kuru race? If it is fit for me to hear it, then
tell me the reason. This Sakuni here says that thou hast lost colour,
become pale and emaciated, and a prey to anxiety. I do not know what can
be the reason of the sorrow. This vast wealth of mine is at thy control.
Thy brothers and all our relations never do anything that is disagreeable
to thee. Thou wearest the best apparel and eatest the best food that is
prepared with meat. The best of horse carries thee. What it is,
therefore, that hath made thee pale and emaciated? Costly beds, beautiful
damsels, mansions decked with excellent furniture, and sport of the
delightful kind, without doubt these all wait but at thy command, as in
the case of the gods themselves Therefore, O proud one, why dost thou
grieve, O son, as if thou wert destitute.'
"Duryodhana said,--'I eat and dress myself like a wretch and pass my time
all the while a prey to fierce jealousy. He indeed is a man, who
incapable of bearing the pride of the foe, liveth having vanquished that
foe with the desire of liberating his own subjects from the tyranny of
the foe. Contentment, as also pride, O Bharata, are destructive of
prosperity; and those other two qualities also, viz., compassion and
fear. One who acteth under the influence of these, never obtaineth
anything high. Having beheld Yudhishthira's prosperity, whatever I enjoy
brings me no gratification. The prosperity of Kunti's son that is
possessed of such splendour maketh me pale. Knowing the affluence of the
foe and my own destitution, even though that affluence is not before me,
I yet see it before me. Therefore, have I lost colour and become
melancholy, pale and emaciated. Yudhishthira supporteth eighty-eight
thousand Snataka Brahmanas leading domestic lives, giving unto each of
them thirty slave-girls. Beside this, thousand other Brahmanas daily eat
at his palace the best of food on golden plates. The king of Kambhoja
sent unto him (as tribute) innumerable skins, black, darkish, and red, of
the deer Kadali, as also numberless blankets of excellent textures. And
hundreds and thousands and thousands of she-elephants and thirty thousand
she-camels wander within the palace, for the kings of the earth brought
them all as tribute to the capital of the Pandavas. And, O lord of earth,
the kings also brought unto this foremost of sacrifices heaps upon heaps
of jewels and gems for the son of Kunti. Never before did I see or hear
of such enormous wealth as was brought unto the sacrifice of the
intelligent sons of Pandu. And, O king, beholding that enormous
collection of wealth belonging to the foe, I can not enjoy peace of mind.
Hundreds of Brahmanas supported by the grants that Yudhishthira hath
given them and possessing wealth of kine, waited at the palace gate with
three thousands of millions of tribute but were prevented by the keepers
from entering the mansion. Bringing with them clarified butter in
handsome Kamandalus made of gold, they did not obtain admission into the
palace, and Ocean himself brought unto him in vessels of white copper the
nectar that is generated within his waters and which is much superior to
that which flowers and annual plants produce for Sakra. And Vasudeva (at
the conclusion of the sacrifice) having brought an excellent conch bathed
the Sun of Pritha with sea water brought in thousand jars of gold, all
well adorned with numerous gems. Beholding all this I became feverish
with jealousy. Those jars had been taken to the Eastern and the Southern
oceans. And they had also been taken on the shoulders of men to the
Western ocean, O bull among men. And, O father, although none but birds
only can go to the Northern region Arjuna, having gone thither, exacted
as tribute a vast quantity of wealth. There is another wonderful incident
also which I will relate to thee. O listen to me. When a hundred thousand
Brahmanas were fed, it had been arranged that to notify this act every
day conches would be blown in a chorus. But, O Bharata, I continually
heard conches blown there almost repeatedly. And hearing those notes my
hair stood on end. And, O great king, that palatial compound, filled with
innumerable monarchs that came there as spectators, looked exceedingly
handsome like the cloudless firmament with stars. And, O king of men, the
monarchs came into that sacrifice of the wise son of Pandu bringing with
them every kind of wealth. And the kings that came there became like
Vaisyas the distributors of food unto the Brahmanas that were fed. And O
king, the prosperity that I beheld of Yudhishthira was such that neither
the chief himself of the celestials, nor Yama or Varuna, nor the lord of
the Guhyakas owneth the same. And beholding that great prosperity of the
son of Pandu, my heart burneth and I cannot enjoy peace.
"Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Sakuni replied,--'Hear how thou
mayest obtain this unrivalled prosperity that thou beholdest in the son
of Pandu, O thou that hast truth for thy prowess. O Bharata, I am an
adept at dice, superior to all in the world. I can ascertain the success
or otherwise of every throw, and when to stake and when not. I have
special knowledge of the game. The Son of Kunti also is fond of dice
playing though he possesseth little skill in it. Summoned to play or
battle, he is sure to come forward, and I will defeat him repeatedly at
every throw by practising deception. I promise to win all that wealth of
his, and thou, O Duryodhana, shalt then enjoy the same.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"King Duryodhana, thus addressed by Sakuni,
without allowing a moment to elapse, said unto Dhritarashtra,--'This,
Sakuni, an adept at dice, is ready to win at dice, O king, the wealth of
the sons of Pandu. It behoveth thee to grant him permission to do so.'
"Dhritarashtra replied,--'I always follow the counsels of Kshatta, my
minister possessed of great wisdom. Having consulted with him, I will
inform thee what my judgment is in respect of this affair. Endued with
great foresight, he will, keeping morality before his eyes, tell us what
is good and what is proper for both parties, and what should be done in
this matter.'
"Duryodhana said,--'If thou consultest with Kshatta he will make thee
desist. And if thou desist, O king, I will certainly kill myself. And
when I am dead, O king, thou wilt become happy with Vidura. Thou wilt
then enjoy the whole earth; what need hast thou with me?'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Dhritarashtra, hearing these words of
affliction uttered by Duryodhana from mixed feeling, himself ready to
what Duryodhana had dictated, commanded his servant, saying,--'Let
artificers be employed to erect without delay a delightful and handsome
and spacious palace with an hundred doors and a thousand columns. And
having brought carpenters and joiners, set ye jewels and precious stones
all over the walls. And making it handsome and easy of access, report to
me when everything is complete. And, O monarch, king Dhritarashtra having
made this resolution for the pacification of Duryodhana, sent messengers
unto Vidura for summoning him. For without taking counsel with Vidura
never did the monarch form any resolution. But as regards the matter at
hand, the king although he knew the evils of gambling, was yet attracted
towards it. The intelligent Vidura, however, as soon as he heard of it,
knew that the arrival of Kali was at hand. And seeing that the way to
destruction was about to open, he quickly came to Dhritarashtra. And
Vidura approaching his illustrious eldest brother and bowing down unto
his feet, said these words:
'O exalted king, I do not approve of this resolution that thou hast
formed. It behave thee, O king, to act in such a way that no dispute may
arise between thy children on account of this gambling match.'
Dhritarashtra replied,--'O Kshatta, if the gods be merciful unto us,
assuredly no dispute will ever arise amongst my sons. Therefore,
auspicious or otherwise, beneficial or otherwise, let this friendly
challenge at dice proceed. Even this without doubt is what fate hath
ordained for us. And, O son of the Bharata race, when I am near, and
Drona and Bhishma and thou too, nothing evil that even Fate might have
ordained is likely to happen. Therefore, go thou on a car yoking thereto
horses endued with the speed of the wind, so that thou mayest reach
Khandavaprastha even today and bring thou Yudhishthira with thee. And, O
Vidura, I tell that even this is my resolution. Tell me nothing. I regard
Fate as supreme which bringeth all this.' Hearing these words of
Dhritarashtra and concluding that his race was doomed, Vidura in great
sorrow went unto Bhishma with great wisdom."
