SECTION LII
Duryodhana said,--"Those king that are revered over all the world, who
are devoted to truth and who are pledged to the observance of rigid vows,
who are possessed of great learning and eloquence, who are fully
conversant with the Vedas and their branches as also with sacrifices, who
have piety and modesty, whose souls are devoted to virtue, who possess
fame, and who have enjoyed the grand rites of coronation, all wait upon
and worship Yudhishthira. And, O king, I beheld there many thousands of
wild kine with as many vessels of white copper for milking them, brought
thither by the kings of the earth as sacrificial presents to be given
away by Yudhishthira unto the Brahmana. And, O Bharata, for bathing
Yudhishthira at the conclusion of the sacrifice, many kings with the
greatest alacrity, themselves brought there in a state of purity many
excellent jars (containing water). And king Vahlika brought there a car
decked with pure gold. And king Sudakshina himself yoked thereto four
white horses of Kamboja breed, and Sunitha of great might fitted the
lower pole and the ruler of Chedi with his own hands took up and fitted
the flag-staff. And the king of the Southern country stood ready with the
coat of mail; the ruler of Magadha, with garlands of flowers and the
head-gear; the great warrior Vasudana with a sixty years old elephant,
the king of Matsya, with the side-fittings of the car, all encased in
gold; king Ekalavya, with the shoes; the king of Avanti, with diverse
kinds of water for the final bath; king Chekitana, with the quiver; the
king of Kasi, with the bow; and Salya; with a sword whose hilt and straps
were adorned with gold. Then Dhaumya and Vyasa, of great ascetic merit,
with Narada and Asita's son Devala, standing before performed the
ceremony of sprinkling the sacred water over the king. And the great
Rishis with cheerful hearts sat where the sprinkling ceremony was
performed. And other illustrious Rishis conversant with the Vedas, with
Jamadagni's son among them, approached Yudhishthira, the giver of large
sacrificial presents, uttering mantras all the while, like the seven
Rishis, approaching the great India in heaven. And Satyaki of unbaffled
prowess held the umbrella (over the king's head). And Dhananjaya and
Bhima were engaged in tanning the king; while the twins held a couple of
chamaras in their hands. And the Ocean himself brought in a sling that
big conch of Varuna which the celestial artificer Viswakarman had
constructed with a thousand Nishkas of gold, and which Prajapati had in a
former Kalpa, presented unto India. It was with that conch that Krishna
bathed Yudhishthira after the conclusion of the sacrifice, and beholding
it, I swooned away. People go to the Eastern or the Western seas and also
to the Southern one. But, O father, none except birds can ever go to the
Northern sea. But the Pandavas have spread their dominion even there, for
I heard hundreds of conches that had been brought thence blown (in the
sacrificial mansion) indicative of auspicious rejoicing. And while those
conches blew simultaneously, my hair stood on end. And those among the
kings, who were weak in strength fell down. And Dhrishtadyumna and
Satyaki and the sons of Pandu and Kesava,--those eight, endued with
strength and prowess and handsome in person, beholding the kings deprived
of consciousness and myself in that plight, laughed outright. Then
Vibhatsu (Arjuna) with a cheerful heart gave, O Bharata, unto the
principal Brahmanas five hundred bullocks with horns plated with gold.
And king Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, having completed the Rajasuya
sacrifice, obtained like the exalted Harishchandra such prosperity that
neither Rantideva nor Nabhaga, nor Jauvanaswa, nor Manu, nor king Prithu
the son of Vena, nor Bhagiratha, Yayati, nor Nahusha, had obtained its
like. And beholding, O exalted one, such prosperity, in the son of Pritha
which is even like that which Harishchandra had, I do not see the least
good in continuing to live, O Bharata! O ruler of men, a yoke that is
tied (to the bullock's shoulders) by a blind man becomes loosened. Even
such is the case with us. The younger ones are growing while the elder
ones are decaying. And beholding all this, O chief of the Kurus, I cannot
enjoy peace even with the aid of reflection. And it is for this, O king,
that I am plunged into grief and becoming pale and emaciated."
