SECTION XLIX
Janamejaya said,--"O thou foremost of all conversant with the Vedas, how
did that game at dice take place, fraught with such evil to the cousins
and through which my grand-sires, the son of Pandu, were plunged into
such sorrow? What kings also were present in that assembly, and who
amongst them approved of the gambling match and who amongst them forbade
it? O sinless one, O chief of regenerate ones, I desire thee to recite in
detail all about this, which, indeed, was the cause of the destruction of
the world."
Santi said,--"Thus addressed by the king, the disciple of Vyasa, endued
with great energy and conversant with the entire Vedas, narrated
everything that had happened."
Vaisampayana said,--"O best of the Bharatas, O great king, if thou
desirest to hear, then listen to me as I narrate to thee everything again
in detail.
"Ascertaining the opinion of Vidura, Dhritarashtra the son of Amvika,
calling Duryodhana told him again in private--'O son of Gandhari, have
nothing to do with dice. Vidura doth not speak well of it. Possessed of
great wisdom, he will never give me advice that is not for my good. I
also regard what Vidura sayeth as exceedingly beneficial for me. Do that,
O son, for I regard it all as for thy good also. Indeed, Vidura knoweth
with all its mysteries the science (of political morality) that the
illustrious and learned and wise Vrihaspati, the celestial Rishi who is
the spiritual guide of Vasava--had unfolded unto the wise chief of the
immortals. And O son, I always accept what Vidura adviseth. O king, as
the wise Uddhava is ever regarded amongst the Vrishnis, so is Vidura
possessed of great intelligence esteemed as the foremost of the Kurus.
Therefore, O son, have nothing to do with dice. It is evident that dice
soweth dissensions. And dissensions are the ruin of the kingdom.
Therefore, O son, abandon this idea of gambling. O son, thou hast
obtained from us what, it hath been ordained, a father and a mother
should give unto their son, viz., ancestral rank and possessions. Thou
art educated and clever in every branch of knowledge, and hast been
brought up with affection in thy paternal dwelling. Born the eldest among
all thy brothers, living within thy own kingdom, why regardest thou
thyself as unhappy? O thou of mighty arms, thou obtainest food and attire
of the very best kind and which is not obtainable by ordinary men. Why
dost thou grieve yet. O son, O mighty-armed one, ruling thy large
ancestral kingdom swelling with people and wealth, thou shinest as
splendidly as the chief of the celestials in heaven. Thou art possessed
of wisdom. It behoveth thee to tell me what can be the root of this grief
that hath made thee so melancholy.
"Duryodhana replied,--'I am a sinful wretch, O king, because I eat and
dress beholding (the prosperity of the foes). It hath been said that man
is a wretch who is not filled with jealousy at the sight of his enemy's
prosperity. O exalted one, this kind of prosperity of mine doth not
gratify me. Beholding that blazing prosperity of the son of Kunti, I am
very much pained. I tell thee strong must be my vitality, in as much as I
am living even at the sight of the whole earth owning the sway of
Yudhishthira. The Nipas, the Chitrakas, the Kukkuras, the Karaskaras, and
the Lauha-janghas are living in the palace of Yudhishthira like bondsmen.
The Himavat, the ocean, the regions on the sea-shore, and the numberless
other regions that yield jewels and gems, have all acknowledged
superiority of the mansion of Yudhishthira in respect of wealth it
containeth. And, O Monarch, regarding me as the eldest and entitled to
respect, Yudhishthira having received me respectfully, appointed me in
receiving the jewels and gems (that were brought as tribute). O Bharata,
the limit and the like of the excellent and invaluable jewels that were
brought there have not been seen. And O king, my hands were fatigued in
receiving that wealth. And when I was tired, they that brought those
valuable articles from distant regions used to wait till I was able to
resume my labour. Bringing jewels from the lake Vindu, the Asura
architect Maya constructed (for the Pandavas) a lake-like surface made of
crystal. Beholding the (artificial) lotuses with which it was filled, I
mistook it, O king for water. And seeing me draw up my clothes (while
about to cross it), Vrikodara (Bhima) laughed at me, regarding me as
wanting in jewels and having lost my head at the sight of the affluence
of my enemy. If I had the ability, I would, O king, without the loss of a
moment, slay Vrikodara for that. But, O monarch, if we endeavour to slay
Bhima now, without doubt, ours will be the fate of Sisupala. O Bharata,
that insult by the foe burneth me. Once again, O king, beholding a
similar lake that is really full of water but which I mistook for a
crystal surface, I fell into it. At that, Bhima with Arjuna once more
laughed derisively, and Draupadi also accompanied by other females joined
in the laughter. That paineth my heart exceedingly. My apparel having
been wet, the menials at the command of the king gave me other clothes.
That also is my great sorrow. And O king, hear now of another mistake
that I speak of. In attempting to pass through what is exactly of the
shape of a door but through which there was really no passage, I struck
my forehead against stone and injured myself. The twins Nakula and
Sahadeva beholding from a distance that I was so hit at the head came and
supported me in their arms, expressing great concern for me. And Sahadeva
repeatedly told me, as if with a smile,--'This O king, is the door. Go
this way!' And Bhimasena, laughing aloud, addressed me and said,--'O son
of Dhritarashtra, this is the door. And, O king I had not even heard of
the names of those gems that I saw in that mansion. And it is for these
reasons that my heart so acheth."
