SECTION XLV
(Dyuta Parva)
Vaisampayana said,--"when that foremost of sacrifices, the Rajasuya so
difficult of accomplishment, was completed, Vyasa surrounded by his
disciples presented himself before Yudhishthira. And Yudhishthira, upon
beholding him quickly rose from his seat, surrounded by his brothers, and
worshipped the Rishi who was his grand-father, with water to wash his
feet and the offer of a seat. The illustrious one having taken his seat
on a costly carpet inlaid with gold, addressed king Yudhishthira the just
and said.--'Take thy seat'. And after the king had taken his seat
surrounded by his brothers, the illustrious Vyasa, truthful in speech
said,--'O son of Kunti, thou growest from good fortune. Thou hast
obtained imperial sway so difficult of acquisition. And O perpetuator of
the Kuru race, all the Kauravas have prospered in consequence of thee. O
Emperor, I have been duly worshipped. I desire now to go with thy leave!
King Yudhishthira the just, thus addressed by the Rishi of dark hue,
saluted (him) his grandfather and touching his feet said,--'O chief of
men, a doubt difficult of being dispelled, hath risen within me. O bull
among regenerate ones, save thee there is none to remove it. The
illustrious Rishi Narada said that (as a consequence of the Rajasuya
sacrifice) three kinds of portents, viz., celestial, atmospherical and
terrestrial ones happen. O grandsire, have those portents been ended by
the fall of the kind of the Chedis?''
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of the king, the exalted
son of Parasara, the island-born Vyasa of dark hue, spoke these
words,--'For thirteen years, O king, those portents will bear mighty
consequences ending in destruction, O king of kings, of all the
Kshatriyas. In course of time, O bull of the Bharata race, making thee
the sole cause, the assembled Kshatriyas of the world will be destroyed,
O Bharata, for the sins of Duryodhana and through the might of Bhima and
Arjuna. In thy dream, O king of kings thou wilt behold towards the end of
this might the blue throated Bhava, the slayer of Tripura, ever absorbed
in meditation, having the bull for his mark, drinking off the human
skull, and fierce and terrible, that lord of all creatures, that god of
gods, the husband of Uma, otherwise called Hara and Sarva, and Vrisha,
armed with the trident and the bow called Pinaka, and attired in tiger
skin. And thou wilt behold Siva, tall and white as the Kailasa cliff and
seated on his bull, gazing unceasingly towards the direction (south)
presided over by the king of the Pitris. Even this will be the dream thou
wilt dream today, O king of kings. Do not grieve for dreaming such a
dream. None can rise superior to the influence of Time. Blest be thou! I
will now proceed towards the Kailasa mountain. Rule thou the earth with
vigilance and steadiness, patiently bearing every privation!'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Having said this, the illustrious and
island-born Vyasa of dark hue, accompanied by his disciples ever
following the dictates of the Vedas, proceeded towards Kailasa. And after
the grand-father had thus gone away, the king afflicted with anxiety and
grief, began to think continuously upon what the Rishi hath said. And he
said to himself, 'Indeed what the Rishi hath said must come to pass. We
will succeed in warding off the fates by exertion alone?' Then
Yudhishthira endued with great energy addressing all his brothers, said,
'Ye tigers among men, ye have heard what the island-born Rishi hath told
me. Having heard the words of the Rishi, I have arrived at this firm
resolution viz., that I should die, as I am ordained to be the cause of
the destruction of all Kshatriyas. Ye my dear ones, if Time hath intended
so what need is there for me to live?' Hearing these words of the king,
Arjuna replied, 'O king, yield not thyself to this terrible depression
that is destructive of reason. Mustering fortitude, O great king, do what
would be beneficial.' Yudhishthira then, firm in truth, thinking all the
while of Dwaipayana's words answered his brothers thus,--'Blest be ye.
Listen to my vow from this day. For thirteen years, what ever purpose
have I to live for, I shall not speak a hard word to my brothers or to
any of the kings of the earth. Living under the command of my relatives,
I shall practise virtue, exemplifying my vow. If I live in this way,
making no distinction between my own children and others, there will be
no disagreement (between me and others). It is disagreement that is the
cause of war in the world. Keeping war at a distance, and ever doing what
is agreeable to others, evil reputation will not be mine in the world, ye
bulls among men. Hearing these words of their eldest brother, the
Pandavas, always engaged in doing what was agreeable to him, approved of
them. And Yudhishthira the just, having pledged so, along with his
brothers in the midst of that assembly, gratified his priests as also the
gods with due ceremonies. And, O bull of the Bharata race, after all the
monarchs had gone away, Yudhishthira along with his brothers, having
performed the usual auspicious rites, accompanied by his ministers
entered his own palace. And, O ruler of men, king Duryodhana and Sakuni,
the son of Suvala, continued to dwell in that delightful assembly house.
