SECTION L
Duryodhana said,--'Listen now, O Bharata, about all the most costly
articles I saw, belonging unto the sons of Pandu, and brought one after
another by the kings of the earth. Beholding that wealth of the foe, I
lost my reason and scarcely knew myself. And, O Bharata, listen as I
describe that wealth consisting of both manufactures and the produce of
the land. The king of Kamboja gave innumerable skins of the best king,
and blankets made of wool, of the soft fur of rodents and other
burroughers, and of the hair of cats,--all inlaid with threads of gold.
And he also gave three hundred horses of the Titteti and the Kalmasha
species possessing noses like parrots. And he also gave three hundred
camels and an equal number of she-asses, all fattened with the olives and
the Pilusha. And innumerable Brahmanas engaged in rearing cattle and
occupied in low offices for the gratification of the illustrious king
Yudhishthira the just waited at the gate with three hundred millions of
tribute but they were denied admission into the palace. And hundred upon
hundreds of Brahmanas possessing wealth of kine and living upon the lands
that Yudhishthira had given them, came there with their handsome golden
Kamandalus filled with clarified butter. And though they had brought such
tribute, they were refused admission into the palace. And the Sudra kings
that dwelt in the regions on the seacoast, brought with them, O king,
hundred thousands of serving girls of the Karpasika country, all of
beautiful features and slender waist and luxuriant hair and decked in
golden ornaments; and also many skins of the Ranku deer worthy even of
Brahmanas as tribute unto king Yudhishthira. And the tribes Vairamas,
Paradas, Tungas, with the Kitavas who lived upon crops that depended on
water from the sky or of the river and also they who were born in regions
on the sea-shore, in woodlands, or countries on the other side of the
ocean waited at the gate, being refused permission to enter, with goats
and kine and asses and camels and vegetable, honey and blankets and
jewels and gems of various kinds. And that great warrior king Bhagadatta,
the brave ruler of Pragjyotisha and the mighty sovereign of the
mlechchas, at the head of a large number of Yavanas waited at the gate
unable to enter, with a considerable tribute comprising of horses of the
best breed and possessing the speed of the wind. And king Bhagadatta
(beholding the concourse) had to go away from the gate, making over a
number of swords with handles made of the purest ivory and well-adorned
with diamonds and every kind of gems. And many tribes coming from
different regions, of whom some possess two eyes, some three and some had
eyes on their foreheads, and those also called Aushmikas, and Nishadas,
and Romakas, some cannibals and many possessing only one leg. I say, O
king, standing at the gate, being refused permission to enter. And these
diverse rulers brought as tribute ten thousand asses of diverse hues and
black necks and huge bodies and great speed and much docility and
celebrated all over the world. And these asses were all of goodly size
and delightful colour. And they were all bred on the coast of Vankhu. And
there were many kings that gave unto Yudhishthira much gold and silver.
And having given much tribute they obtained admission into the palace of
Yudhishthira. The people that came there possessing only one leg gave
unto Yudhishthira many wild horses, some of which were as red as the
cochineal, and some white, and some possessing the hues of the rainbow
and some looking like evening clouds, and some that were of variegated
colour. And they were all endued with the speed of the mind. And they
also gave unto the king enough gold of superior quality. I also saw
numberless Chins and Sakas and Uddras and many barbarous tribes living in
the woods, and many Vrishnis and Harahunas, and dusky tribes of the
Himavat, and many Nipas and people residing in regions on the sea-coast,
waiting at the gate being refused permission to enter. And the people of
Valhika gave unto him as tribute ten thousand asses, of goodly size and
black necks and daily running two hundred miles, And those asses were of
many shapes. And they were well-trained and celebrated all over the
world. And possessed of symmetrical proportion and excellent colour,
their skins were pleasant to the touch. And the Valhikas also presented
numerous blankets of woollen texture manufactured in Chin and numerous
skins of the Ranku deer, and clothes manufactured from jute, and others
woven with the threads spun by insects. And they also gave thousands of
other clothes not made of cotton, possessing the colour of the lotus. And
these were all of smooth texture. And they also gave soft sheep-skins by
thousands. And they also gave many sharp and long swords and scimitars,
and hatchets and fine-edged battle-axes manufactured in the western
countries. And having presented perfumes and jewels and gems of various
kinds by thousands as tribute, they waited at the gate, being refused
admission into the palace. And the Sakas and Tukhatas and Tukharas and
Kankas and Romakas and men with horns bringing with them as tribute
numerous large elephants and ten thousand horses, and hundreds and
hundreds of millions of gold waited at the gate, being refused permission
to enter. And the kings of the eastern countries having presented
numerous valuable articles including many costly carpets and vehicles and
beds, and armours of diverse hues decked with jewels and gold and ivory,
and weapons of various kinds, and cars of various shapes and handsome
make and adorned with gold, with well-trained horses trimmed with tiger
skins, and rich and variegated blankets for caprisoning elephants, and
various kinds of jewels and gems, arrows long and short and various other
kinds of weapons, obtained permission to enter the sacrificial palace of
the illustrious Pandava!'"
