SECTION XLVI
Vaisampayana said,--"That bull among men, Duryodhana, continued to dwell
in that, assembly house (of the Pandavas). And with Sakuni, the Kuru
prince slowly examined the whole of that mansion, and the Kuru prince
beheld in it many celestial designs, which he had never seen before in
the city called after the elephant (Hastinapore). And one day king
Duryodhana in going round that mansion came upon a crystal surface. And
the king, from ignorance, mistaking it for a pool of water, drew up his
clothes. And afterwards finding out his mistake the king wandered about
the mansion in great sorrow. And sometime after, the king, mistaking a
lake of crystal water adorned with lotuses of crystal petals for land,
fell into it with all his clothes on. Beholding Duryodhana fallen into
the lake, the mighty Bhima laughed aloud as also the menials of the
palace. And the servants, at the command of the king, soon brought him
dry and handsome clothes. Beholding the plight of Duryodhana, the mighty
Bhima and Arjuna and both the twins--all laughed aloud. Being unused to
putting up with insults, Duryodhana could not bear that laugh of theirs.
Concealing his emotions he even did not cast his looks on them. And
beholding the monarch once more draw up his clothes to cross a piece of
dry land which he had mistaken for water, they all laughed again. And the
king sometime after mistook a closed door made of crystal as open. And as
he was about to pass through it his head struck against it, and he stood
with his brain reeling. And mistaking as closed another door made of
crystal that was really open, the king in attempting to open it with
stretched hands, tumbled down. And coming upon another door that was
really open, the king thinking it as closed, went away from it. And, O
monarch, king Duryodhana beholding that vast wealth in the Rajasuya
sacrifice and having become the victim of those numerous errors within
the assembly house at last returned, with the leave of the Pandavas, to
Hastinapore.
And the heart of king Duryodhana, afflicted at sight of the prosperity of
the Pandavas, became inclined to sin, as he proceeded towards his city
reflecting on all he had seen and suffered. And beholding the Pandavas
happy and all the kings of the earth paying homage to them, as also
everybody, young and old, engaged in doing good unto them, and reflecting
also on the splendour and prosperity of the illustrious sons of Pandu,
Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, became pale. In proceeding (to his
city) with an efflicted heart, the prince thought of nothing else but
that assembly house and that unrivalled prosperity of the wise
Yudhishthira. And Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, was so taken up
with his thoughts then that he spoke not a word to Suvala's son even
though the latter addressed him repeatedly. And Sakuni, beholding him
absent-minded, said,--'O Duryodhana, why art thou proceeding thus'?
"Duryodhana replied,--O uncle, beholding this whole earth owning the sway
of Yudhishthira in consequence of the might of the illustrious Arjuna's
weapons and beholding also that sacrifice of the son of Pritha like unto
the sacrifice of Sakra himself of great glory among the celestials, I,
being filled with jealousy and burning day and night, am being dried up
like a shallow tank in the summer season. Behold, when Sisupala was slain
by the chief of the Satwatas, there was no man to take the side of
Sisupala. Consumed by the fire of the Pandava, they all forgave that
offence; otherwise who is there that could forgive it? That highly
improper act of grave consequence done by Vasudeva succeeded in
consequence of the power of the illustrious son of Pandu. And so many
monarchs also brought with them various kinds of wealth for king
Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, like tribute-paying Vaisyas! Beholding
Yudhishthira's prosperity of such splendour, my heart burneth, efflicted
with jealously, although it behoveth me not to be jealous.'
"Having reflected in this way, Duryodhana, as if burnt by fire, addressed
the king of Gandhara again and said,--'I shall throw myself upon a
flaming fire or swallow poison or drown myself in water. I cannot live.
What man is there in the world possessed of vigour who can bear to see
his foes in the enjoyment of prosperity and himself in destitution?
Therefore I who bear to see that accession of prosperity and fortune (in
my foes) am neither a woman nor one that is not a woman, neither also a
man nor one that is not a man. Beholding their sovereignty over the world
and vast affluence, as also that sacrifice, who is there like me that
would not smart under all that? Alone I am incapable of acquiring such
royal prosperity; nor do I behold allies that could help me in the
matter. It is for this that I am thinking of self-destruction. Beholding
that great and serene prosperity of the son of Kunti, I regard Fate as
supreme and exertions fruitless. O son of Suvala, formerly I strove to
compass his destruction. But baffling all my efforts he hath grown in
prosperity even like the lotus from within a pool of water. It is for
this that I regard Fate as supreme and exertions fruitless. Behold, the
sons of Dhritarashtra are decaying and the sons of Pritha are growing day
by day. Beholding that prosperity of the Pandavas, and that assembly
house of theirs, and those menials laughing at me, my heart burneth as if
it were on fire. Therefore, O uncle, know me now as deeply grieved and
filled with jealousy, and speak of it to Dhritarashtra.
