SECTION LXIII
Duryodhana said,--'O Kshatta, thou art always boasting of the fame of our
enemies, deprecating the sons of Dhritarashtra. We know, O Vidura, of
whom thou art really fond. Thou always disregardest us as children, That
man standeth confest, who wisheth for success unto those that are near to
him and defeat unto those that are not his favourites. His praise and
blame are applied accordingly. Thy tongue and mind betray thy heart. But
the hostility thou showeth in speech is even greater than what is in thy
heart. Thou hast been cherished by us like a serpent on our lap. Like a
cat thou wishest evil unto him that cherisheth thee. The wise have said
that there is no sin graver than that of injuring one's master. How is
it, O Kshatta, that thou dost not fear this sin? Having vanquished our
enemies we have obtained great advantages. Use not harsh words in respect
of us. Thou art always willing to make peace with the foes. And it is for
this reason that thou hatest us always. A man becometh a foe by speaking
words that are unpardonable. Then again in praising the enemy, the
secrets of one's own party should not be divulged. (Thou however,
transgressest this rule). Therefore, O thou parasite, why dost thou
obstruct us so? Thou sayest whatever thou wishest. Insult us not. We know
thy mind. Go and learn sitting at the feet of the old. Keen up the
reputation that thou hast won. Meddle not with the affairs of other men.
Do not imagine that thou art our chief. Tell us not harsh words always, O
Vidura. We do not ask thee what is for our good. Cease, irritate not
those that have already borne too much at thy hands. There is only one
Controller, no second. He controlleth even the child that is in the
mother's womb. I am controlled by Him. Like water that always floweth in
a downward course, I am acting precisely in the way in which He is
directing me. He that breaketh his head against a stone-wall, and he that
feedeth a serpent, are guided in those acts of theirs by their own
intellect. (Therefore, in this matter I am guided by my own
intelligence). He becometh a foe who seeketh to control others by force.
When advice, however, is offered in a friendly spirit, the learned bear
with it. He again that hath set fire to such a highly inflammable object
as camphor, beholdeth not its ashes. If he runneth immediately to
extinguish it. One should not give shelter to another who is the friend
of his foes, or to another who is ever jealous of his protector or to
another who is evil-minded. Therefore, O Vidura, go whither-so-ever thou
pleasest. A wife that is unchaste, however well-treated, forsaketh her
husband yet.'
"Vidura addressing Dhritarashtra, said, 'O monarch, tell us (impartially)
like a witness what thou thinkest of the conduct of those who abandon
their serving-men thus for giving instruction to them. The hearts of
kings are, indeed, very fickle. Granting protection at first, they strike
with clubs at last. O prince (Duryodhana), thou regardest thyself as
mature in intellect, and, O thou of bad heart, thou regardest me as a
child. But consider that he is a child who having first accepted one for
a friend, subsequently findeth fault with him. An evil-hearted man can
never be brought to the path of rectitude, like an unchaste wife in the
house of a well-born person. Assuredly, instruction is not agreeable to
this bull of the Bharata race like a husband of sixty years to a damsel
that is young. After this, O king, if thou wishest to hear words that are
agreeable to thee, in respect of all acts good or bad, ask thou women and
idiots and cripples or persons of that description. A sinful man speaking
words that are agreeable may be had in this world. But a speaker of words
that are disagreeable though sound as regimen, or a hearer of the same,
is very rare. He indeed, is a king's true ally who disregarding what is
agreeable or disagreeable to his master beareth himself virtuously and
uttereth what may be disagreeable but necessary as regimen. O great king,
drink thou that which the honest drink and the dishonest shun, even
humility, which is like a medicine that is bitter, pungent, burning,
unintoxicating, disagreeable, and revolting. And drinking it, O king,
regain thou thy sobriety. I always wish Dhritarashtra and his sons
affluence and fame. Happen what may unto thee, here I bow to thee (and
take my leave). Let the Brahmanas wish me well. O son of Kuru, this is
the lesson I carefully inculcate, that the wise should never enrage such
as adders as have venom in their very glances!"
