SECTION LXII
"Vidura said,--"Gambling is the root of dissensions. It bringeth about
disunion. Its consequences are frightful. Yet having recourse to this,
Dhritarashtra's son Duryodhana createth for himself fierce enmity. The
descendants of Pratipa and Santanu, with their fierce troops and their
allies the Vahlikas, will, for the sins of Duryodhana meet with
destruction. Duryodhana, in consequence of this intoxication, forcibly
driveth away luck and prosperity from his kingdom, even like an infuriate
bull breaking his own horns himself. That brave and learned person who
disregarding his own foresight, followeth, O king, (the bent of) another
man's heart, sinketh in terrible affliction even like one that goeth into
the sea in a boat guided by a child. Duryodhana is gambling with the son
of Pandu, and thou art in raptures that he is winning. And it is such
success that begeteth war, which endeth in the destruction of men. This
fascination (of gambling) that thou has well-devised only leadeth to dire
results. Thus hast thou simply brought on by these counsels great
affliction to thy heart. And this thy quarrel with Yudhishthira, who is
so closely related to thee, even if thou hadst not foreseen it, is still
approved by thee. Listen, ye sons of Santanu, ye descendants of Pratipa,
who are now in this assembly of the Kauravas, to these words of wisdom.
Enter ye not into the terrible fire that hath blazed forth following the
wretch. When Ajatasatru, the son of Pandu, intoxicated with dice, giveth
way to his wrath, and Vrikodara and Arjuna and the twins (do the same),
who, in that hour of confusion, will prove your refuge? O great king,
thou art thyself a mine of wealth. Thou canst earn (by other means) as
much wealth as thou seekest to earn by gambling. What dost thou gain by
winning from the Pandavas their vast wealth? Win the Pandavas themselves,
who will be to thee more than all the wealth they have. We all know the
skill of Suvala in play. This hill-king knoweth many nefarious methods in
gambling. Let Sakuni return whence he came. War not, O Bharata, with the
sons of Pandu!'
