SECTION LVII
Vaisampayana said,--"Vidura then, thus commanded against his will by king
Dhritarashtra, set out, with the help of horses of high mettle and endued
with great speed and strength, and quiet and patient, for the abode of
the wise sons of Pandu. Possessed of great intelligence, Vidura proceeded
by the way leading to the capital of the Pandavas. And having arrived at
the city of king Yudhishthira, he entered it and proceeded towards the
palace, worshipped by numberless Brahmanas. And coming to the palace
which was even like unto the mansion of Kuvera himself, the virtuous
Vidura approached Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma. Then the illustrious
Ajamida devoted to truth and having no enemy on earth, reverentially
saluted Vidura, and asked him about Dhritarashtra and his sons. And
Yudhishthira said, "O Kshatta, thy mind seemeth to be cheerless. Dost
thou come here in happiness and peace? The sons of Dhritarashtra, I hope,
are obedient to their old father. The people also, I hope, are obedient
to Dhritarashtra's rule.'
"Vidura said,--'The illustrious king, with his sons, is well and happy,
and surrounded by his relatives he reigneth even like Indra himself. The
king is happy with his sons who are all obedient to him and hath no
grief. The illustrious monarch is bent on his own aggrandisement. The
king of the Kurus hath commanded me to enquire after thy peace and
prosperity, and to ask thee to repair to Hastinapore with thy brothers
and to say, after beholding king Dhritarashtra's newly erected palace,
whether that one is equal to thy own. Repairing thither, O son of Pritha,
with thy brothers, enjoy ye in that mansion and sit to a friendly match
at dice. We shall be glad if thou goest, as the Kurus have already
arrived there. And thou wilt see there those gamblers and cheats that the
illustrious king Dhritarashtra hath already brought thither. It is for
this, O king, that I have come hither. Let the king's command be approved
by thee.
"Yudhishthira said,--'O Kshatta, if we sit to a match at dice, we may
quarrel. What man is there, who knowing all this, will consent to gamble?
What dost thou think fit for us? We all are obedient to thy counsels.'
"Vidura said,--'I know that gambling is the root of misery, and I strove
to dissuade the king from it. The king, however, hath sent me to thee.
Having known all this, O learned one, do what is beneficial.
"Yudhishthira said,--'Besides the sons of Dhritarashtra what other
dishonest gamblers are there ready for play? Tell us, O Vidura, who they
are and with whom we shall have to play, staking hundreds upon hundreds
of our possessions.'
"Vidura said,--'O monarch, Sakuni, the king of Gandhara, an adept at
dice, having great skill of hand and desperate in stakes, Vivingati, king
Chitrasena, Satyavrata, Purumitra and Jaya, these, O king, are there.'
"Yudhishthira said,--'It would seem then that some of the most desperate
and terrible gamblers always depending upon deceit are there. This whole
universe, however, is at the will of its Maker, under the control of
fate. It is not free. O learned one, I do not desire, at the command of
king Dhritarashtra to engage myself in gambling. The father always
wisheth to benefit his son. Thou art our master, O Vidura. Tell me what
is proper for us. Unwilling as I am to gamble, I will not do so, if the
wicked Sakuni doth not summon me to it in the Sabha? If, however, he
challengeth me, I will never refuse. For that, as settled, is my eternal
vow."
Vaisampayana continued,--"King Yudhishthira the just having said this
unto Vidura, commanded that preparations for his journey might be made
without loss of time. And the next day, the king accompanied by his
relatives and attendants and taking with him also the women of the
household with Draupadi in their midst, set out for the capital of the
Kurus. 'Like some brilliant body falling before the eyes, Fate depriveth
us of reason, and man, tied as it were with a cord, submitteth to the
sway of Providence,' saying this, king Yudhishthira, that chastiser of
the foe, set out with Kshatta, without deliberating upon that summons
from Dhritarashtra. And that slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Pandu
and Pritha, riding upon the car that had been given him by the king of
Valhika, and attired also in royal robes, set out with his brothers. And
the king, blazing as it were with royal splendour, with Brahmanas walking
before him, set out from his city, summoned by Dhritarashtra and impelled
by what hath been ordained by Kala (Time). And arriving at Hastinapore he
went to the palace of Dhritarashtra. And going there, the son of Pandu
approached the king. And the exalted one then approached Bhishma and
Drona and Karna, and Kripa, and the son of Drona, and embraced and was
embraced by them all. And the mighty-armed one, endued with great
prowess, then approached Somadatta, and then Duryodhana and Salya, and
the son of Suvala, and those other kings also that had arrived there
before him. The king then went to the brave Dusshasana and then to all
his (other) brothers and then to Jayadratha and next to all the Kurus one
after another. And the mighty-armed one, then surrounded by all his
brothers, entered the apartment of the wise king Dhritarashtra. And then
Yudhishthira beheld the reverend Gandhari, ever obedient to her lord, and
surrounded by her daughters-in-law like Rohini by the stars. And saluting
Gandhari and blessed by her in return, the king then beheld his old
uncle, that illustrious monarch whose wisdom was his eye. King
Dhritarashtra then, O monarch, smelt his head as also the heads of those
four other princes of the Kuru race, viz., the sons of Pandu with
Bhimasena as their eldest. And, O king, beholding--the handsome Pandava
those tigers among men, all the Kurus became exceedingly glad. And
commanded by the king, the Pandavas then retired to the chambers allotted
to them and which were all furnished with jewels and gems. And when they
had retired into the chambers, the women of Dhritarashtra's household
with Dussala taking the lead visited them. And the daughters-in-law of
Dhritarashtra beholding the blazing and splendid beauty and prosperity of
Yajnaseni, became cheerless and filled with jealousy. And those tigers
among men, having conversed with the ladies went through their daily
physical exercises and then performed the religious rites of the day. And
having finished their daily devotions, they decked their persons with
sandal paste of the most fragrant kind. And desiring to secure good luck
and prosperity they caused (by gifts) the Brahmanas to utter
benedictions. And then eating food that was of the best taste they
retired to their chambers for the night. And those bulls among the Kurus
then were put to sleep with music by handsome females. And obtaining from
them what came in due succession, those subjugators of hostile towns
passed with cheerful hearts that delightful night in pleasure and sport.
And waked by the bards with sweet music, they rose from their beds, and
having passed the night thus in happiness, they rose at dawn and having
gone through the usual rites, they entered into the assembly house and
were saluted by those that were ready there for gambling."
