SECTION LXVIII
Draupadi said,--'Wait a little, thou worst of men, thou wicked-minded
Dussasana. I have an act to perform--a high duty that hath not been
performed by me yet. Dragged forcibly by this wretch's strong arms, I was
deprived of my senses. I salute these reverend seniors in this assembly
of the Kurus. That I could not do this before cannot be my fault.'"
Vaisampayana said,--"Dragged with greater force than before, the
afflicted and helpless Draupadi, undeserving of such treatment, falling
down upon the ground, thus wept in that assembly of the Kurus,--
"'Alas, only once before, on the occasion of the Swayamvara, I was beheld
by the assembled kings in the amphitheatre, and never even once beheld
afterwards. I am to-day brought before this assembly. She whom even the
winds and the sun had seen never before in her palace is to-day before
this assembly and exposed to the gaze of the crowd. Alas, she whom the
sons of Pandu could not, while in her palace, suffer to be touched even
by the wind, is to-day suffered by the Pandavas to be seized and dragged
by this wretch. Alas, these Kauravas also suffer their daughter-in-law,
so unworthy of such treatment, to be thus afflicted before them. It
seemeth that the times are out of joint. What can be more distressing to
me, than that though high-born and chaste, I should yet be compelled to
enter this public court? Where is that virtue for which these kings were
noted? It hath been heard that the kings of ancient days never brought
their wedded wives into the public court. Alas, that eternal usage hath
disappeared from among the Kauravas. Else, how is it that the chaste wife
of the Pandavas, the sister of Prishata's son, the friend of Vasudeva, is
brought before this assembly? Ye Kauravas, I am the wedded wife of king
Yudhishthira the just, hailing from the same dynasty to which the King
belonged. Tell me now if I am a serving-maid or otherwise. I will
cheerfully accept your answer. This mean wretch, this destroyer of the
name of the Kurus, is afflicting me hard. Ye Kauravas, I cannot bear it
any longer. Ye kings, I desire ye to answer whether ye regard me as won
or unwon. I will accept your verdict whatever it be.'
"Hearing these words, Bhishma answered, I have already said, O blessed
one that the course of morality is subtle. Even the illustrious wise in
this world fail to understand it always. What in this world a strong man
calls morality is regarded as such by others, however otherwise it may
really be; but what a weak man calls morality is scarcely regarded as
such even if it be the highest morality. From the importance of the issue
involved, from its intricacy and subtlety, I am unable to answer with
certitude the question thou hast asked. However, it is certain that as
all the Kurus have become the slaves of covetousness and folly, the
destruction of this our race will happen on no distant date. O blessed
one, the family into which thou hast been admitted as a daughter-in-law,
is such that those who are born in it, however much they might be
afflicted by calamities, never deviate from the paths of virtue and
morality. O Princess of Panchala, this conduct of thine also, viz. that
though sunk in distress, thou still easiest thy eyes on virtue and
morality, is assuredly worthy of thee. These persons, Drona and others,
of mature years and conversant with morality, sit heads downwards like
men that are dead, with bodies from which life hath departed. It seemeth
to me, however, that Yudhishthira is an authority on this question. It
behoveth him to declare whether thou art won or not won."
