SECTION LXX
"Karna said,--'Of all the persons in the assembly, three, viz., Bhishma,
Vidura, and the preceptor of the Kurus (Drona) appear to be independent;
for they always speak of their master as wicked, always censure him, and
never wish for his prosperity. O excellent one, the slave, the son, and
the wife are always dependent. They cannot earn wealth, for whatever they
earn belongeth to their master. Thou art the wife of a slave incapable of
possessing anything on his own account. Repair now to the inner
apartments of king Dhritarashtra and serve the king's relatives. We
direct that that is now thy proper business. And, O princess, all the
sons of Dhritarashtra and not the sons of Pritha are now thy masters. O
handsome one, select thou another husband now,--one who will not make
thee a slave by gambling. It is well-known that women, especially that
are slaves, are not censurable if they proceed with freedom in electing
husbands. Therefore let it be done by thee. Nakula hath been won, as also
Bhimasena, and Yudhishthira also, and Sahadeva, and Arjuna. And, O
Yajnaseni, thou art now a slave. Thy husbands that are slaves cannot
continue to be thy lords any longer. Alas, doth not the son of Pritha
regards life, prowess and manhood as of no use that he offereth this
daughter of Drupada, the king of Panchala, in the presence of all this
assembly, as a stake at dice?'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words, the wrathful Bhima
breathed hard, a very picture of woe. Obedient to the king and bound by
the tie of virtue and duty, burning everything with his eyes inflamed by
anger, he said,--'O king, I cannot be angry at these words of this son of
a Suta, for we have truly entered the state of servitude. But O king,
could our enemies have said so unto me, it thou hadst not played staking
this princess?'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"Hearing these words of Bhimasena king
Duryodhana addressed Yudhishthira who was silent and deprived of his
senses, saying,--'O king, both Bhima and Arjuna, and the twins also, are
under thy sway. Answer thou the question (that hath been asked by
Draupadi). Say, whether thou regardest Krishna as unwon.' And having
spoken thus unto the son of Kunti, Duryodhana. desirous of encouraging
the son of Radha and insulting Bhima, quickly uncovered his left thigh
that was like unto the stem of a plantain tree or the trunk of an
elephant and which was graced with every auspicious sign and endued with
the strength of thunder, and showed it to Draupadi in her very sight. And
beholding this, Bhimasena expanding his red eyes, said unto Duryodhana in
the midst of all those kings and as if piercing them (with his dart-like
words),--'Let not Vrikodara attain to the regions, obtained by his
ancestors, if he doth not break that thigh of thine in the great
conflict. And sparkles of fire began to be emitted from every organ of
sense of Bhima filled with wrath, like those that come out of every crack
and orifice in the body of a blazing tree.
Vidura then, addressing everybody, said,--'Ye kings of Pratipa's race,
behold the great danger that ariseth from Bhimasena. Know ye for certain
that this great calamity that threatens to overtake the Bharatas hath
been sent by Destiny itself. The sons of Dhritarashtra have, indeed,
gambled disregarding every proper consideration. They are even now
disputing in this assembly about a lady (of the royal household). The
prosperity of our kingdom is at an end. Alas, the Kauravas are even now
engaged in sinful consultations. Ye Kauravas, take to your heart this
high precept that I declare. If virtue is persecuted, the whole assembly
becometh polluted. If Yudhishthira had staked her before he was himself
won, he would certainly have been regarded as her master. If, however a
person staketh anything at a time when he himself is incapable of holding
any wealth, to win it is very like obtaining wealth in a dream. Listening
to the words of the king of Gandhara, fall ye not off from this undoubted
truth.'
"Duryodhana, hearing Vidura thus speak, said,--'I am willing to abide by
the words of Bhima, of Arjuna and of the twins. Let them say that
Yudhishthira is not their master. Yajnaseni will then be freed from her
state of bondage."
"Arjuna at this, said,--"This illustrious son of Kunti, king Yudhishthira
the just, was certainly our master before he began to play. But having
lost himself, let all the Kauravas judge whose master he could be after
that."
Vaisampayana continued,--"Just then, a jackal began to cry loudly in the
homa-chamber of king Dhritarashtra's palace. And, O king, unto the jackal
that howled so, the asses began to bray responsively. And terrible birds
also, from all sides, began to answer with their cries. And Vidura
conversant with everything and the daughter of Suvala, both understood
the meaning of those terrible sounds. And Bhishma and Drona and the
learned Gautama loudly cried,--Swashti! Swashti![1] Then Gandhari and the
learned Vidura beholding that frightful omen, represented everything, in
great affliction, unto the king. And the king (Dhritarashtra) thereupon
said,--
'Thou wicked-minded Duryodhana, thou wretch, destruction hath all ready
overtaken thee when thou insultest in language such as this the wife of
these bulls among the Kurus, especially their wedded wife Draupadi. And
having spoken those words, the wise Dhritarashtra endued with knowledge,
reflecting with the aid of his wisdom and desirous of saving his
relatives and friends from destruction, began to console Krishna, the
princess of Panchala, and addressing her, the monarch said,--'Ask of me
any boon, O princess of Panchala, that thou desirest, Chaste and devoted
to virtue, thou art the first of all my daughters-in-law.
"Draupadi said,--'O bull of the Bharata race, if thou will grant me a
boon, I ask the handsome Yudhishthira, obedient to every duty, be freed
from slavery. Let not unthinking children call my child Prativindhya
endued with great energy of mind as the son of a slave. Having been a
prince, so superior to all men, and nurtured by kings it is not proper
that he should be called the child of a slave.
"Dhritarashtra said unto her,--'O auspicious one, let it be as thou
sayest. O excellent one, ask thou another boon, for I will give it. My
heart inclineth to give thee a second boon. Thou dost not deserve only
one boon.
"Draupadi said,--'I ask, O king, that Bhimasena and Dhananjaya and the
twins also, with their cars and bows, freed from bondage, regain their
liberty.'
'Dhritarashtra said,--'O blessed daughter, let it be as thou desirest.
Ask thou a third boon, for thou hast not been sufficiently honoured with
two boons. Virtuous in thy behaviour, thou art the foremost of all my
daughters-in-law.
Draupadi said,--'O best of kings, O illustrious one, covetousness always
bringeth about loss of virtue. I do not deserve a third boon. Therefore I
dare not ask any. O king of kings, it hath been said that a Vaisya may
ask one boon; a Kshatriya lady, two boons; a Kshatriya male, three, and a
Brahmana, a hundred. O king, these my husbands freed from the wretched
state of bondage, will be able to achieve prosperity by their own
virtuous acts!'"
