SECTION LXXII
"Yudhishthira said,--'O king, thou art our master. Command us as to what
we shall do. O Bharata, we desire to remain always in obedience to thee.
"Dhritarashtra replied.--'O Ajatasatru, blest be thou. Go thou in peace
and safety. Commanded by me, go, rule thy own kingdom with thy wealth.
And, O child, take to heart this command of an old man, this wholesome
advice that I give, and which is even a nutritive regimen. O
Yudhishthira, O child, thou knowest the subtle path of morality.
Possessed of great wisdom, thou art also humble, and thou waitest also
upon the old. Where there is intelligence, there is forbearance.
Therefore, O Bharata, follow thou counsels of peace. The axe falleth upon
wood, not upon stone. (Thou art open to advice, not Duryodhana). They are
the best of men that remember not the acts of hostility of their foes;
that behold only the merits, not the faults, of their enemies; and that
never enter into hostilities themselves. They that are good remember only
the good deeds of their foes and not the hostile acts their foes might
have done unto them. The good, besides, do good unto others without
expectation of any good, in return. O Yudhishthira, it is only the worst
of men that utter harsh words in quarrelling; while they that are
indifferent reply to such when spoken by others. But they that are good
and wise never think of or recapitulate such harsh words, little caring
whether these may or may not have been uttered by their foes. They that
are good, having regard to the state of their own feelings, can
understand the feelings of others, and therefore remember only the good
deeds and not the acts of hostility of their foes. Thou hast acted even
as good men of prepossessing countenance do, who transgress not the
limits of virtue, wealth, pleasure and salvation. O child, remember not
the harsh words of Duryodhana. Look at thy mother Gandhari and myself
also, if thou desirest to remember only what is good. O Bharata, look at
me, who am thy father unto you and am old and blind, and still alive. It
was for seeing our friends and examining also the strength and weakness
of my children, that I had, from motives of policy, suffered this match
at dice to proceed. O king those amongst the Kurus that have thee for
their ruler, and the intelligent Vidura conversant with every branch of
learning for their counsellor, have, indeed, nothing to grieve for. In
thee is virtue, in Arjuna is patience, in Bhimasena is prowess, and the
twins, those foremost of men, is pure reverence for superiors. Blest be
thou, O Ajatasatru. Return to Khandavaprastha, and let there be brotherly
love between thee and thy cousins. Let thy heart also be ever fixed on
virtue.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"That foremost of the Bharatas--king
Yudhishthira the just--then, thus addressed by his uncle, having gone
through every ceremony of politeness, set out with his brothers for
Khandavaprastha. And accompanied by Draupadi and ascending their cars
which were all of the hue of the clouds, with cheerful hearts they all
set out for that best of cities called Indraprastha."
