SECTION LXXVII
Yudhishthira said,--'I bid farewell unto all the Bharatas, unto my old
grand-sire (Bhishma), king Somadatta, the great king Vahlika, Drona,
Kripa, all the other kings, Aswathaman, Vidura, Dhritarashtra, all the
sons of Dhritarashtra, Yayutsu, Sanjaya, and all the courtiers, I bid
fare well, all of ye and returning again I shall see you."
Vaisampayana continued,--"Overcome with shame none of those that were
present there, could tell Yudhishthira anything. Within their hearts,
however, they prayed for the welfare of that intelligent prince.
Vidura then said,--The reverend Pritha is a princess by birth. It
behoveth her not to go into the woods. Delicate and old and ever known to
happiness the blessed one will live, respected by me, in my abode. Known
this, ye sons of Pandu. And let safety be always yours.'
Vaisampayana continued,--'The Pandavas thereupon said,--O sinless one,
let it be as thou sayest. Thou art our uncle, and, therefore like as our
father. We also are all obedient to thee. Thou art, O learned one, our
most respected superior. We should always obey what thou choosest to
command. And, O high-souled one, order thou whatever else there is that
remaineth to be done.
"Vidura replied,--'O Yudhishthira, O bull of the Bharata race, know this
to be my opinion, that one that is vanquished by sinful means need not be
pained by such defeat. Thou knowest every rule of morality; Dhananjaya is
ever victorious in battle; Bhimasena is the slayer of foes; Nakula is the
gatherer of wealth; Sahadeva hath administrative talents, Dhaumya is the
foremost of all conversant with the vedas; and the well-behaved Draupadi
is conversant with virtue and economy. Ye are attached to one another and
feel delight at one another's sight and enemies can not separate you from
one another, and ye are contented. Therefore, who is there that will not
envy ye? O Bharata, this patient abstraction from the possession of the
world will be of great benefit to thee. No foe, even if he were equal to
sakra himself, will be able to stand it. Formerly thou wert instructed on
the mountains of Himavat by Meru Savarni; in the town of Varanavata by
Krishna Dwaipayana; on the cliff of Bhrigu by Rama; and on the banks of
the Dhrishadwati by Sambhu himself. Thou hast also listened to the
instruction of the great Rishi Asita on the hills of Anjana; and thou
becamest a disciple of Bhrigu on the banks of the Kalmashi. Narada and
this thy priest Dhaumya will now become thy instructors. In the matter of
the next world, abandon not these excellent lessons thou hast obtained
from the Rishis. O son of Pandu. thou surpassest in intelligence even
Pururavas, the son of Ila; in strength, all other monarchs, and in
virtue, even the Rishis. Therefore, resolve thou earnestly to win
victory, which belongeth to Indra; to control thy wrath, which belongeth
to Yama; to give in charity, which belongeth to Kuvera; and to control
all passions, which belongeth to Varuna. And, O Bharata, obtain thou the
power of gladdening from the moon, the power of sustaining all from
water; forbearance from the earth; energy from the entire solar disc;
strength from the winds, and affluence from the other elements. Welfare
and immunity from ailment be thine; I hope to see thee return. And, O
Yudhishthira, act properly and duly in all seasons,--in those of
distress--in those of difficulty,--indeed, in respect of everything, O
son of Kunti, with our leave go hence. O Bharata, blessing be thine. No
one can say that ye have done anything sinful before. We hope to see
thee, therefore, return in safety and crowned with success."
Vaisampayana continued,--"Thus addressed by Vidura, Yudhishthira the son
of Pandu, of prowess incapable of being baffled, saying, 'So be it,'
bowing low unto Bhishma and Drona, went away."
