SECTION LXXVI
Vaisampayana said,--"Then the vanquished sons of Pritha prepared for
their exile into the woods. And they, one after another, in due order,
casting off their royal robes, attired themselves in deer-skins. And
Dussasana, beholding those chastisers of foes, dressed in deer-skins and
deprived of their kingdom and ready to go into exile, exclaimed 'The
absolute sovereignty of the illustrious king Duryodhana hath commenced.
The sons of Pandu have been vanquished, and plunged into great
affliction. Now have we attained the goal either by broad or narrow
paths. For today becoming superior to our foes in point of prosperity as
also of duration of rule have we become praiseworthy of men. The sons of
Pritha have all been plunged by us into everlasting hell. They have been
deprived of happiness and kingdom for ever and ever. They who, proud of
their wealth, laughed in derision at the son of Dhritarashtra, will now
have to go into the woods, defeated and deprived by us of all their
wealth. Let them now put off their variegated coats of mail, their
resplendent robes of celestial make, and let them all attire themselves
in deer-skins according to the stake they had accepted of the son of
Suvala. They who always used to boast that they had no equals in all the
world, will now know and regard themselves in this their calamity as
grains of sesame without the kernel. Although in this dress of theirs the
Pandavas seem like unto wise and powerful persons installed in a
sacrifice, yet they look like persons not entitled to perform sacrifices,
wearing such a guise. The wise Yajnasena of the Somake race, having
bestowed his daughter--the princess of Panchala--on the sons of Pandu,
acted most unfortunately for the husbands of Yajnaseni--these sons of
Pritha are as eunuchs. And O Yajnaseni, what joy will be thine upon
beholding in the woods these thy husbands dressed in skins and
thread-bare rags, deprived of their wealth and possessions. Elect thou a
husband, whomsoever thou likest, from among all these present here. These
Kurus assembled here, are all forbearing and self-controlled, and
possessed of great wealth. Elect thou one amongst these as thy lord, so
that these great calamity may not drag thee to wretchedness. 'The sons of
Pandu now are even like grains of sesame without the kernel, or like
show-animals encased in skins, or like grains of rice without the kernel.
Why shouldst thou then longer wait upon the fallen sons of Pandu? Vain is
the labour used upon pressing the sesame grain devoid of the kernel!'
"Thus did Dussasana, the son of Dhritarashtra, utter in the hearing of
the Pandavas, harsh words of the most cruel import. And hearing them, the
unforbearing Bhima, in wrath suddenly approaching that prince like a
Himalayan lion upon a jackal, loudly and chastisingly rebuked him in
these words,--Wicked-minded villain, ravest thou so in words that are
uttered alone by the sinful? Boastest thou thus in the midst of the
kings, advanced as thou art by the skill of the king of Gandhara. As thou
piercest our hearts hear with these thy arrowy words, so shall I pierce
thy heart in battle, recalling all this to thy mind. And they also who
from anger or covetousness are walking behind thee as thy
protectors,--them also shall I send to the abode of Yama with their
descendants and relatives."
Vaisampayana continued,--Unto Bhima dressed in deer-skins and uttering
these words of wrath without doing any thing, for he could not deviate
from the path of virtue, Dussasana abandoning all sense of shame, dancing
around the Kurus, loudly said, 'O cow! O cow!'
Bhima at this once more said,--Wretch darest thou, O Dussasana, use harsh
words as these? Whom doth it behove to boast, thus having won wealth by
foul means? I tell thee that if Vrikodara, the son of Pritha, drinketh
not thy life-blood, piercing open thy breast in battle, let him not
attain to regions of blessedness, I tell thee truly that by slaying the
sons of Dhritarashtra in battle, before the very eyes of all the
warriors, I shall pacify this wrath of mine soon enough.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"And as the Pandavas were going away from the
assembly, the wicked king Duryodhana from excess of joy mimiced by his
own steps the playful leonine trade of Bhima. Then Vrikodara, half
turning towards the king said, Think not ye fool that by this thou
gainest any ascendency over me slay thee shall I soon with all thy
followers, and answer thee, recalling all this to thy mind. And beholding
this insult offered to him, the mighty and proud Bhima, suppressing his
rising rage and following the steps of Yudhishthira, also spake these
words while going out of the Kaurava court, 'I will slay Duryodhana, and
Dhananjaya will slay Karna, and Sahadeva will slay Sakuni that gambler
with dice. I also repeat in this assembly these proud words which the
gods will assuredly make good, if ever we engage in battle with the
Kurus, I will slay this wretched Duryodhana in battle with my mace, and
prostrating him on the ground I will place my foot on his head. And as
regards this (other) wicked person--Dussasana who is audacious in speech,
I will drink his blood like a lion.
"And Arjuna said,--O Bhima, the resolutions of superior men are not known
in words only. On the fourteenth year from this day, they shall see what
happeneth.
"And Bhima again said,--'The earth shall drink the blood of Duryodhana,
and Karna, and the wicked Sakuni, and Dussasana that maketh the fourth.'
"And Arjuna said,--'O Bhima, I will, as thou directest, slay in battle
this Karna so malicious and jealous and harsh-speeched and vain. For
doing what is agreeable to Bhima, Arjuna voweth that he will slay in
battle with his arrows this Karna with all his followers. And I will send
unto the regions of Yama also all those other kings that will from
foolishness fight against me. The mountains of Himavat might be removed
from where they are, the maker of the day lose his brightness, the moon
his coldness, but this vow of mine will ever be cherished. And all this
shall assuredly happen if on the fourteenth year from this, Duryodhana
doth not, with proper respect, return us our kingdom.'"
Vaisampayana continued,--"After Arjuna had said this, Sahadeva the
handsome son of Madri, endued with great energy, desirous of slaying
Sakuni, waving his mighty arms and sighing like snake, exclaimed, with
eyes red with anger--'Thou disgrace of the Gandhara kings, those whom
thou thinkest as defeated are not really so. Those are even sharp-pointed
arrows from whose wounds thou hast run the risk in battle. I shall
certainly accomplish all which Bhima hath said adverting to thee with all
thy followers. If therefore thou hast anything to do, do it before that
day cometh. I shall assuredly slay thee in battle with all thy followers
soon enough, it thou, O son of Suvala, stayest in the light pursuant to
the Kshatriya usage.'
"'Then, O monarch hearing these words of Sahadeva, Nakula the handsomest
of men spake these words,--'I shall certainly send unto the abode of Yama
all those wicked sons of Dhritarashtra, who desirous of death and
impelled by Fate, and moved also by the wish of doing what is agreeable
to Duryodhana, have used harsh and insulting speeches towards this
daughter o Yajnasena at the gambling match. Soon enough shall I, at the
command of Yudhishthira and remembering the wrongs to Draupadi, make the
earth destitute of the sons of Dhritarashtra.'
Vaisampayana continued,--"And those tigers among men, all endued with
long arms, having thus pledged themselves to virtuous promises approached
king Dhritarashtra."
