SECTION VIII
"Vyasa said, 'O wise Dhritarashtra, hear what I say! I will tell thee
that which is for the great good of all the Kauravas! O thou of mighty
arms, it hath not pleased me that the Pandavas have gone to the forest
dishonestly defeated (at dice) by Duryodhana and others! O Bharata, on
the expiration of the thirteenth year, recollecting all their woes, they
may shower death-dealing weapons, even like virulent poison, upon the
Kauravas! Why doth thy sinful son of wicked heart, ever inflamed with
ire, seek to slay the sons of Pandu for the sake of their kingdom? Let
the fool be restrained; let thy son remain quiet! In attempting to slay
the Pandavas in exile, he will only lose his own life. Thou art as honest
as the wise Vidura, or Bhishma, or ourselves, or Kripa, or Drona, O thou
of great wisdom, dissension with one's own kin are forbidden, sinful and
reprehensible! Therefore, O king, it behoveth thee to desist from such
acts! And, O Bharata, Duryodhana looketh with such jealousy towards the
Pandavas that great harm would be the consequence, if thou didst not
interfere. Or let this wicked son of thine, O monarch, along and
unaccompanied, himself go to the forest and live with the sons of Pandu.
For then, if the Pandavas, from association, feel an attachment for
Duryodhana, then, O king of men, good fortune may be thine. (This,
however, may not be)! For it hath been heard that one's congenital nature
leaveth him not till death. But what do Bhishma and Drona and Vidura
think? What also dost thou think? That which is beneficial should be done
while there is time, else thy purposes will be unrealised.'"
