SECTION XV
"Yudhishthira said, 'O illustrious Vasudeva of mighty arms, tell thou in
detail of the death of the lord of Saubha. My curiosity hath not been
appeased by the narration.'
"Vasudeva said, 'O mighty-armed king, hearing that the son of Srutasravas
(Sisupala) had been slain by me, Salwa, O best of the Bharata race, came
to the city of Dwaravati! And, O son of Pandu, the wicked king,
stationing his forces in array, besieged that city around and above. And
stationing himself in the upper regions, the king began his fight with
the city. And that encounter commenced with a thick shower of weapons
from all sides. And, O bull of the Bharata race, the city at that time
was well-fortified on all sides, according to the science (of
fortification), with pennons, and arches, and combatants, and walls and
turrets, and engines, and miners, and streets barricaded with spiked
wood-works and towers and edifices with gate-ways well-filled with
provisions, and engines for hurling burning brands and fires, and
vessels, of deer-skins (for carrying water), and trumpets, tabors, and
drums, lances and forks, and Sataghnis, and plough-shares, rockets, balls
of stone and battle-axes and other weapons and shield embossed with iron,
and engines for hurling balls and bullets and hot liquids! And the city
was also well-defended by numerous cars, and, O tiger among Kurus, by
Gada and Shamva and Uddhava and others, and by warriors of prowess tried
in battle, all well-born and capable of encountering any foe! And these
all placing themselves on commanding posts, aided by cavalry and
standard-bearers, began to defend the town. And Ugrasena and Uddhava and
others, to prevent carelessness, Proclaimed throughout the city that
nobody should drink. And all the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, well-knowing
that they would be slain by Salwa if they behaved carelessly, remained
sober and watchful. And the police soon drove out of the city all mimes
and dancers and singers of the Anartta country. And all the bridges over
rivers were destroyed, and boats forbidden to ply, and the trenches
(around the city) were spiked with poles at the bottom. And the land
around the city for full two miles was rendered uneven, and holes and
pits were dug thereon, and combustibles were secreted below the surface.
Our fort, O sinless one, is naturally strong and always well-defended and
filled with all kinds of weapons! And in consequence of the preparations
made, our city was more prepared than ever to meet the foe. And, O chief
of the Bharatas, in consequence of all this, the city looked like that of
Indra himself. And, O king, at the time of Salwa's approach, nobody could
either enter or leave the town of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas without
presenting the sign that had been agreed upon. And all the streets of the
town and the open spaces were filled with numerous elephants and horses!
And, O thou of mighty arms, the combatants were all specially gratified
with allowances and wages, and rations, and weapons, and dresses! And
amongst the combatants there was none who was not paid in gold, and none
who was not paid at all, and none who was not somehow obliged, and none
who was not of tried valour! And, O thou of eyes like lotus-leaves, it
was thus Dwaraka, abounding in well-ordered arrangements, was defended by
Ahuka (Ugrasena)!'"
