SECTION XVI
"Vasudeva continued, 'O king of kings, Salwa, the lord of Saubha, came
towards our city with an immense force consisting of infantry, cavalry
and elephants! And the army headed by king Salwa, consisting of four
kings of forces, occupied a level ground commanding a copious
water-supply. And forsaking cemeteries and temples dedicated to the gods,
and sacred trees, and grounds covered by ant-hills, that host occupied
every other place. And the roads (leading to the city) were blocked up by
the divisions of the army, and the secret entrances also were all blocked
up by the enemy's camp. And, O Kauravya, like unto the lord of birds
(Garuda), the ruler of Saubha rushed towards Dwaraka, bringing with him,
O bull among men, his host equipped with all kinds of arms, skilled in
all weapons, consisting of a dense display of cars and elephants and
cavalry abounding in banners, and well-paid and well-fed foot-soldiers
possessed of great strength and bearing every mark of heroism and
furnished with wonderful chariots and bows. And beholding the army of
Salwa, the youthful princess of the Vrishni race resolved to encounter it
sallying out of the city. And, O king, Charudeshna, Samva, and the mighty
warrior Pradyumna, O descendant of the Kuru race, sailed out, ascending
on their chariots, and clad in mail, and decked with ornaments, with
colours flying, resolved to encounter the mighty and countless host of
Salwa! And Samva taking up his bows eagerly attacked on the field of
battle Kshemavriddhi, the commander of Salwa's forces and his chief
counsellor also! And, O thou foremost of Bharatas, the son of Jambavati
then began to shower arrows in a continuous stream even as Indra
showereth down rain! And, O mighty king, then Kshemavriddhi, the
commander of Salwa's forces, bore that shower of arrows, immovable as the
Himavat! And, O foremost of kings, Kshemavriddhi on his part, discharged
at Samva mightier volley of shafts, aided by his powers of illusion! And
dispersing by counter illusion that discharge inspired by illusion, Samva
showered on his (adversary's) car a thousand arrows! Then pierced by the
shafts on Samva and overwhelmed there with Kshemavriddhi, the commander
of the hostile host, left the field by the help of his fleet-steed! And
when the wicked general of Salwa had left the field, a mighty Daitya
called Vegavat rushed at my son! And, O best of monarchs, thus attacked,
the heroic Samva, the perpetuator of the Vrishni race, bore that onset of
Vegavat, keeping his ground. And, O son of Kunti, the heroic Samva, of
prowess incapable of being baffled, whirling a quickly-going mace, hurled
it speedily at Vegavat! And, O king, struck with that mace, Vegavat fell
down on the ground, like a weather-beaten and faded lord of the forest of
decayed roots! And on that heroic Asura of mighty energy, being slain
with the mace, my son entered within that mighty host and began to fight
with all. And, O great king, a well-known Danava named Vivindhya, a
mighty warrior wielding a large and powerful bow, encountered
Charudeshna! And, O monarch, the encounter between Charudeshna and
Vivindhya was as fierce as that in days of yore between Vritra and
Vasava! And enraged with each other the combatants pierced each other
with their arrows, uttering loud roars like unto two powerful lions! Then
the son of Rukmini fixed on his bow-string a mighty weapon possessing the
splendour of fire or the sun, and capable of destroying all foes, having
first vivified it with incantations! Then, O monarch, that mighty warrior
my son, fired with wrath, challenged Vivindhya and discharged the weapon
at him. And the Danava struck with that weapon, fell down on the ground a
lifeless corpse! And beholding Vivindhya slain, and the whole host waver,
Salwa advanced again on his beautiful car capable of going everywhere.
And, O king of mighty arms, beholding Salwa on that beautiful car of his,
the combatants of Dwaraka wavered with fear! But, O thou of the Kuru
race, Pradyumna sailed out, and, O great king, bidding the Anarttas be of
good cheer, said, 'Waver ye not, and staying behold me fight I Even I
shall, by force, repell that car with Salwa on it! Ye Yadavas, this day,
I shall, with my weapons like unto serpents discharged from my bow with
my hand, destroy this host of the lord of Saubha! Be of good cheer, ye
all! Fear not! The lord of Saubha will be slain today! Attached by me,
the wretch will meet with destruction together with his car!' O son of
Pandu, upon Pradyumna speaking thus with cheerful heart, the Yadava host,
O hero, remained on the field, and began to fight cheerfully!'"
