SECTION XXXII
"Draupadi said, 'I do not ever disregard or slander religion, O son of
Pritha! Why should I disregard God, the lord of all creatures? Afflicted
with woe, know me, O Bharata, to be only raving I will once more indulge
in lamentations; listen to me with attention O persecutor of all enemies,
every conscious creature should certainly act in this world. It is only
the immobile, and not other creatures, that may live without acting. The
calf, immediately after its birth, sucketh the mothers' teat. Persons
feel pain in consequence of incantations performed with their statues. It
seemeth, therefore, O Yudhishthira, that creatures derive the character
of their lives from their acts of former lives. Amongst mobile creatures
man differeth in this respect that he aspireth, O bull of the Bharata
race, to affect his course of life in this and the other world by means
of his acts. Impelled by the inspiration of a former life, all creatures
visibly (reap) in this world the fruits of their acts. Indeed, all
creatures live according to the inspiration of a former life, even the
Creator and the Ordainer of the universe, like a crane that liveth on the
water (untaught by any one.) If a creature acteth not, its course of life
is impossible. In the case of a creature, therefore, there must be action
and not inaction. Thou also shouldest act, and not incur censure by
abandoning action. Cover thyself up, as with an armour, with action.
There may or may not be even one in a thousand who truly knoweth the
utility of acts or work. One must act for protecting as also increasing
his wealth; for if without seeking to earn, one continueth to only spend,
his wealth, even if it were a hoard huge as Himavat, would soon be
exhausted. All the creatures in the world would have been exterminated,
if there were no action. If also acts bore no fruits, creatures would
never have multiplied. It is even seen that creatures sometimes perform
acts that have no fruits, for without acts the course of life itself
would be impossible. Those persons in the world who believe in destiny,
and those again who believe in chance, are both the worst among men.
Those only that believe in the efficacy of acts are laudable. He that
lieth at ease, without activity, believing in destiny alone, is soon
destroyed like an unburnt earthen pot in water. So also he that believeth
in chance, i.e., sitteth inactive though capable of activity liveth not
long, for his life is one of weakness and helplessness. If any person
accidentally acquireth any wealth, it is said he deriveth it from chance,
for no one's effort hath brought about the result. And, O son of Pritha,
whatever of good fortune a person obtaineth in consequence of religious
rites, that is called providential. The fruit, however that a person
obtaineth by acting himself, and which is the direct result of those acts
of his, is regarded as proof of personal ability. And, O best of men,
know that the wealth one obtaineth spontaneously and without cause is
said to be a spontaneous acquisition. Whatever is thus obtained by
chance, by providential dispensation, spontaneously, of as the result of
one's acts is, however, the consequence of the acts of a former life. And
God, the Ordainer of the universe, judging according to the acts of
former lives, distributeth among men their portions in this world.
Whatever acts, good or bad, a person performeth, know that they are the
result of God's, arrangements agreeably to the acts of a former life.
This body is only the instruments in the hands of God, for doing the acts
that are done. Itself, inert, it doth as God urgeth it to do. O son of
Kunti, it is the Supreme Lord of all who maketh all creatures do what
they do. The creatures themselves are inert. O hero, man, having first
settled some purpose in his mind, accomplisheth it, himself working with
the aid of his intelligence. We, therefore, say that man is himself the
cause (of what he doeth). O bull among men, it is impossible to number
the acts of men, for mansions and towns are the result of man's acts.
Intelligent men know, by help of their intellect, that oil may be had
from sesame, curds from milk, and that food may be cooked by means of
igniting fuel. They know also the means for accomplishing all these. And
knowing them, they afterwards set themselves, with proper appliances, to
accomplish them. And creatures support their lives by the results
achieved in these directions by their own acts. If a work is executed by
a skilled workman, it is executed well. From differences (in
characteristics), another work may be said to be that of an unskilful
hand. If a person were not, in the matter of his acts, himself the cause
thereof, then sacrifices would not bear any fruits in his case nor would
any body be a disciple or a master. It is because a person is himself the
cause of his work that he is applauded when he achieved success. So the
doer is censured if he faileth. If a man were not himself the cause of
his acts, how would all this be justified? Some say that everything is
the result of Providential dispensation; others again, that this is not
so, but that everything which is supposed to be the result of destiny or
chance is the result of the good or the bad acts of former lives. It is
seen, possessions are obtained from chance, as also from destiny
Something being from destiny and something from chance, something is
obtained by exertion. In the acquisition of his objects, there is no
fourth cause in the case of man. Thus say those that are acquainted with
truth and skilled in knowledge. If, however, God himself were not the
giver of good and bad fruits, then amongst creatures there would not be
any that was miserable. If the effect of former acts be a myth, then all
purposes for which man would work should be successful. They, therefore,
that regard the three alone (mentioned above) as the doors of all success
and failure in the world, (without regarding the acts of former life),
are dull and inert like the body itself. For all this, however, a person
should act. This is the conclusion of Manu himself. The person that doth
not act, certainly succumbeth, O Yudhishthira. The man of action in this
world generally meeteth with success. The idle, however, never achieveth
success. If success, becometh impossible, then should one seek to remove
the difficulties that bar his way to success. And, O king, if a person
worketh (hard), his debt (to the gods) is cancelled (whether he achieveth
success or not). The person that is idle and lieth at his length, is
overcome by adversity; while he that is active and skillful is sure to
reap success and enjoy prosperity. Intelligent persons engaged in acts
with confidence in themselves regard all who are diffident as doubting
and unsuccessful. The confident and faithful, however, are regarded by
them as successful. And this moment misery hath overtaken us. If,
however, thou betakest to action, that misery will certainly be removed.
If thou meetest failure, then that will furnish a proof unto thee and
Vrikodara and Vivatsu and the twins (that ye are unable to snatch the
kingdom from the foe). The acts of others, it is seen, are crowned with
success. It is probable that ours also will be successful. How can one
know beforehand what the consequence will be? Having exerted thyself thou
wilt know what the fruit of thy exertion will be. The tiller tilleth with
the plough the soil and soweth the seeds thereon. He then sitteth silent,
for the clouds (after that) are the cause that would help the seeds to
grow into plants. If however, the clouds favour him not, the tiller is
absolved from all blame. He sayeth unto himself, 'What others do, I have
done. If, notwithstanding this, I meet with failure, no blame can attach
to me.' Thinking so, he containeth himself and never indulgeth in
self-reproach. O Bharata, no one should despair saying, 'Oh, I am acting,
yet success is not mine! For there are two other causes, besides
exertion, towards success. Whether there be success or failure, there
should be no despair, for success in acts dependeth upon the union; of
many circumstances. If one important element is wanting, success doth not
become commensurate, or doth not come at all. If however, no exertion is
made, there can be no success. Nor is there anything to applaud in the
absence of all exertion. The intelligent, aided by their intelligence,
and according to their full might bring place, time, means, auspicious
rites, for the acquisition of prosperity. With carefulness and vigilance
should one set himself to work, his chief guide being his prowess. In the
union of qualities necessary for success in work, prowess seemeth to be
the chief. When the man of intelligence seeth his enemy superior to him
in many qualities, he should seek the accomplishment of his purposes by
means, of the arts of conciliation and proper appliances. He should also
wish evil unto his foe and his banishment. Without speaking of mortal
man, if his foe were even the ocean or the hills, he should be guided by
such motives. A person by his activity in searching for the holes of his
enemies, dischargeth his debt to himself as also to his friends. No man
should ever disparage himself for the man that disparageth himself never
earneth high prosperity. O Bharata, success in this world is attainable
on such conditions! In fact, success in the World is said to depend on
acting according to time and circumstances. My father formerly kept a
learned Brahmana with him. O bull of the Bharata race, he said all this
unto my father. Indeed, these instructions as to duty, uttered by
Vrihaspati himself, were first taught to my brothers. It was from them
that I heard these afterwards while in my father's house. And, O
Yudhishthira, while at intervals of business, I went out (of the inner
apartments) and sat on the lap of my father, that learned Brahmana used
to recite unto me these truths, sweetly consoling me therewith!"
