SECTION XXIX
Yudhishthira said, 'Anger is the slayer of men and is again their
prosperor. Know this, O thou possessed of great wisdom, that anger is the
root of all prosperity and all adversity. O thou beautiful one, he that
suppresseth his anger earneth prosperity. That man, again, who always
giveth way to anger, reapeth adversity from his fierce anger. It is seen
in this world that anger is the cause of destruction of every creature.
How then can one like me indulge his anger which is so destructive of the
world? The angry man commiteth sin. The angry man killeth even his
preceptors. The angry man insulteth even his superiors in harsh words.
The man that is angry faileth to distinguish between what should be said
and what should not. There is no act that an angry man may not do, no
word that an angry man may not utter. From anger a man may slay one that
deserveth not to be slain, and may worship one that deserveth to be
slain. The angry man may even send his own soul to the regions of Yama.
Beholding all these faults, the wise control their anger, desirous of
obtaining high prosperity both in this and the other world. It is for
this that they of tranquil souls have banished wrath. How can one like us
indulge in it then? O daughter of Drupada, reflecting upon all this, my
anger is not excited One that acteth not against a man whose wrath hath
been up, rescueth himself as also others from great fear. In fact, he may
be regarded to be the physician of the two (viz., himself and angry man).
If a weak man, persecuted by others, foolishly becometh angry towards men
that are mightier than he, he then becometh himself the cause of his own
destruction. And in respect of one who thus deliberately throweth away
his life, there are no regions hereafter to gain. Therefore, O daughter
of Drupada, it hath been said that a weak man should always suppress his
wrath. And the wise man also who though presecuted, suffereth not his
wrath to be roused, joyeth in the other world--having passed his
persecutor over in indifference. It is for this reason hath it been said
that a wise man, whether strong or weak, should ever forgive his
persecutor even when the latter is in the straits. It is for this, O
Krishna, that the virtuous applaud them that have conquered their wrath.
Indeed, it is the opinion of the virtuous that the honest and forgiving
man is ever victorious. Truth is more beneficial than untruth; and
gentleness than cruel behaviour. How can one like me, therefore, even for
the purpose of slaying Duryodhana, exhibit anger which hath so many
faults and which the virtuous banish from their souls? They that are
regarded by the learned of foresight, as possessed of (true) force of
character, are certainly those who are wrathful in outward show only. Men
of learning and of true insight call him to be possessed of force of
character who by his wisdom can suppress his risen wrath. O thou of fair
hips, the angry man seeth not things in their true light. The man that is
angry seeth not his way, nor respecteth persons. The angry man killeth
even those that deserve not to be killed. The man of wrath slayeth even
his preceptors. Therefore, the man possessing force of character should
ever banish wrath to a distance. The man that is overwhelmed with wrath
acquireth not with ease generosity, dignity, courage, skill, and other
attributes belonging to real force of character. A man by forsaking anger
can exhibit proper energy, whereas, O wise one, it is highly difficult
for the angry man to exhibit his energy at the proper time! The ignorant
always regard anger as equivalent to energy. Wrath, however hath been
given to man for the destruction of the world. The man, therefore, who
wisheth to behave properly, must ever forsake anger. Even one who hath
abandoned the excellent virtues of his own order, it is certain,
indulgeth in wrath (if behaveth properly). If fools, of mind without
light, transgress in every respect, how, O faultless one, can one like me
transgress (like them)? If amongst men there were not persons equal unto
the earth in forgiveness, there would be no peace among men but continued
strife caused by wrath. If the injured return their injuries, if one
chastised by his superior were to chastise his superior in return, the
consequence would be the destruction of every creature, and sin also
would prevail in the world. If the man who hath ill speeches from
another, returneth those speeches afterwards; if the injured man
returneth his injuries: if the chastised person chastiseth in return; if
fathers slay sons, and sons fathers and if husbands slay wives, and wives
husbands; then, O Krishna, how can birth take place in a world where
anger prevaileth so! For, O thou of handsome face, know that the birth of
creatures is due to peace! If the kings also, O Draupadi, giveth way to
wrath, his subjects soon meet with destruction. Wrath, therefore, hath
for its consequence the destruction and the distress of the people. And
because it is seen that there are in the world men who are forgiving like
the Earth, it is therefore that creatures derive their life and
prosperity. O beautiful one, one should forgive under every injury. It
hath been said that the continuation of species is due to man being
forgiving. He, indeed, is a wise and excellent person who hath conquered
his wrath and who showeth forgiveness even when insulted, oppressed, and
angered by a strong person. The man of power who controleth his wrath,
hath (for his enjoyment) numerous everlasting regions; while he that is
angry, is called foolish, and meeteth with destruction both in this and
the other world. O Krishna, the illustrious and forgiving Kashyapa hath,
in this respect, sung the following verses in honour of men that are ever
forgiving, 'Forgiveness is virtue; forgiveness is sacrifice, forgiveness
is the Vedas, forgiveness is the Shruti. He that knoweth this is capable
of forgiving everything. Forgiveness is Brahma; forgiveness is truth;
forgiveness is stored ascetic merit; forgiveness protecteth the ascetic
merit of the future; forgiveness is asceticism; forgiveness is holiness;
and by forgiveness is it that the universe is held together. Persons that
are forgiving attain to the regions obtainable by those that have
preformed meritorious sacrifices, or those that are well-conversant with
the Vedas, or those that have high ascetic merit. Those that perform
Vedic sacrifices as also those that perform the meritorious rites of
religion obtain other regions. Men of forgiveness, however, obtain those
much-adored regions that are in the world of Brahma. Forgiveness is the
might of the mighty; forgiveness is sacrifice; forgiveness is quiet of
mind. How, O Krishna, can one like us abandon forgiveness, which is such,
and in which are established Brahma, and truth, and wisdom and the
worlds? The man of wisdom should ever forgive, for when he is capable of
forgiving everything, he attaineth to Brahma. The world belongeth to
those that are forgiving; the other world is also theirs. The forgiving
acquire honours here, and a state of blessedness hereafter. Those men
that ever conquer their wrath by forgiveness, obtain the higher regions.
Therefore hath it been said that forgiveness is the highest virtue.'
Those are the verses sung by Kashyapa in respect of those that are
everforgiving. Having listened, O Draupadi, to these verses in respect of
forgiveness, content thyself! Give not way to thy wrath! Our grandsire,
the son of Santanu, will worship peace; Krishna, the son of Devaki, will
worship peace; the preceptor (Drona) and Vidura called Kshatri will both
speak of peace; Kripa and Sanjaya also will preach peace. And Somadatta
and Yuyutshu and Drona's son and our grandsire Vyasa, every one of them
speaketh always of peace. Ever urged by these towards peace, the king
(Dhritarashtra) will, I think, return us our kingdom. If however, he
yieldeth to temptation, he will meet with destruction. O lady, a crisis
hath come in the history of Bharatas for plunging them into calamity!
This hath been my certain conclusion from some time before! Suyodhana
deserveth not the kingdom. Therefore hath he been unable to acquire
forgiveness. I, however, deserve the sovereignty and therefore is it that
forgiveness hath taken possession of me. Forgiveness and gentleness are
the qualities of the self-possessed. They represent eternal virtue. I
shall, therefore, truly adopt those qualities."
