SECTION XL
"Mahadeva said, 'Thou wert in thy former life Nara, the friend of
Narayana. In Vadari wert thou engaged in fierce ascetic austerities for
several thousands of years. In thee as well as in Vishnu--that first of
male beings--dwelleth great might. Ye both, by your might, hold the
universe; O lord, taking up that fierce bow whose twang resembled the
deep roar of the clouds, thou, as well as Krishna, chastisedest the
Danavas during the coronation of Indra. Even this Gandiva is that bow, O
son of Pritha, fit for thy hands. O foremost of male beings, I snatched
it from thee, helped by my powers of illusion. This couple of quivers,
fit for thee, will again be inexhaustible, O son of Pritha! And, O son of
the Kuru race, thy body will be free from pain and disease. Thy prowess
is incapable of being baffled. I have been pleased with thee. And, O
first of male beings, ask thou of me the boon that thou desirest. O
chastiser of all foes, O giver of proper respect, (to those deserving it)
not even in heaven is there any male being who is equal to thee, nor any
Kshatriya who is thy superior.'
"Arjuna said, 'O illustrious god having the bull for thy sign, if thou
wilt grant me my desire, I ask of thee, O lord that fierce celestial
weapon wielded by thee and called Brahmasira--that weapon of terrific
prowess which destroyeth, at the end of the Yuga the entire
universe--that weapon by the help of which, O god of gods, I may under
thy grace, obtain victory in the terrible conflict which shall take place
between myself (on one side), and Karna and Bhishma and Kripa and Drona
(on the other)--that weapon by which I may consume in battle Danavas and
Rakshasas and evil spirits and Pisachas and Gandharvas and Nagas--that
weapon which when hurled with Mantras produceth darts by thousands and
fierce-looking maces and arrows like snakes of virulent poison, and by
means of which I may fight with Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and Karna of
ever abusive tongue, O illustrious destroyer of the eyes of Bhaga, even
this is my foremost desire, viz., that I may be able to fight with them
and obtain success.'
Bhava replied, 'O powerful one. I will give to thee that favourite weapon
of mine called the Pasuputa. O son of Pandu, thou art capable of holding,
hurling, and withdrawing it. Neither the chief himself of the gods, nor
Yama, nor the king of the Yakshas, nor Varuna, nor Vayu, knoweth it. How
could men know anything of it? But, O son of Pritha, this weapon should
not be hurled without adequate cause; for if hurled at any foe of little
might it may destroy the whole universe. In the three worlds with all
their mobile and immobile creatures, there is none who is incapable of
being slain by this weapon. And it may be hurled by the mind, by the eye,
by words, and by the bow.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words, the son of Pritha purified
himself. And approaching the lord of the universe with rapt attention, he
said, 'Instruct me!' Mahadeva then imparted unto that best of Pandu's son
the knowledge of that weapon looking like the embodiment of Yama,
together with all the mysteries about hurling and withdrawing it. And
that weapon thence began to wait upon Arjuna as it did upon Sankara, the
lord of Uma. And Arjuna also gladly accepted it. And at the moment the
whole earth, with its mountains and woods and trees and seas and forests
and villages and towns and mines, trembled. And the sounds of conchs and
drums and trumpets by thousands began to be heard. And at that moment
hurricanes and whirlwinds began to blow. And the gods and the Danavas
beheld that terrible weapon in its embodied form stay by the side of
Arjuna of immeasurable energy. And whatever of evil there had been in the
body of Phalguna of immeasurable energy was all dispelled by the touch of
the three-eyed deity. And the three eyed god then commanded Arjuna,
saying, 'Go thou into heaven.' Arjuna then, O king, worshipping the god
with bent head, gazed at him, with joined hands. Then the lord of all the
dwellers of heaven, the deity of blazing splendour having his abode on
mountain-breasts, the husband of Uma, the god of passions under complete
control, the source of all blessings, Bhava gave unto Arjuna, that
foremost of men, the great bow called Gandiva, destructive of Danavas and
Pisachas. And the god of gods, then leaving that blessed mountain with
snowy plateaus and vales and caves, favourite resort of sky-ranging great
Rishis, went up, accompanied by Uma into the skies, in the sight of that
foremost of men."
