SECTION XXXIX
Vaisampayana said, "After all those illustrious ascetics had gone away,
that wielder of the Pinaka and cleanser of all sins--the illustrious
Hara--assuming the form of a Kirata resplendent as a golden tree, and
with a huge and stalwart form like a second Meru, and taking up a hand
some bow and a number of arrows resembling snakes of virulent poison, and
looking like an embodiment of fire, came quickly down on the breast of
Himavat. And the handsome god of gods was accompanied by Uma in the guise
of a Kirata woman, and also by a swarm of merry spirits of various forms
and attire, and by thousands of women in the form and attire of Kiratas.
And, O king, that region suddenly blazed up in beauty, in consequence of
the arrival of the god of gods in such company. And soon enough a solemn
stillness pervaded the place. The sounds of springs, and water-courses,
and of birds suddenly ceased. And as the god of gods approached Pritha's
son of blameless deeds, he beheld a wonderful sight, even that of a
Danava named Muka, seeking, in the form of a boar, to slay Arjuna.
Phalguna, at the sight of the enemy seeking to slay him, took up the
Gandiva and a number of arrows resembling snakes of virulent poison. And
stringing his bow and filling the air with its twang, he addressed the
boar and said, 'I have come here but done thee no injury. As thou seekest
to slay me, I shall certainly send thee to the abode of Yama.' And
beholding that firm wielder of the bow--Phalguna--about to slay the boar,
Sankara in the guise of a Kirata suddenly bade him stop saying, 'The boar
like the mountain of Indrakila in hue hath been aimed at by me first';
Phalguna, however, disregarding these words, struck the boar. The Kirata
also blazing splendour, let fly an arrow like flaming fire and resembling
the thunderbolt at the same object. And the arrows thus shot by both fell
at the same instant of time upon the wide body of Muka, hard as adamant.
And the two shafts fell upon the boar with a loud sound, even like that
of Indra's thunderbolt and the thunder of the clouds falling together
upon the breast of a mountain. And Muka, thus struck by two shafts which
produced numerous arrows resembling snakes of blazing mouths, yielded up
his life, assuming once more his terrible Rakshasa form. Jishnu--that
slayer of foes--then beheld before him that person, of form blazing as
god, and attired in the dress of a Kirata and accompanied by many women.
And beholding him, the son of Kunti with a joyous heart addressed him
smilingly and said, 'Who art thou that thus wanderest in these solitary
woods, surrounded by women? thou of the splendour of gold, art thou not
afraid of this terrible forest? Why, again, didst thou shoot the boar
that was first aimed at by me? This Rakshasa that came hither, listlessly
or with the object, of slaying me, had been first aimed at by me. Thou
shalt not, therefore, escape from me with life. Thy behaviour towards me
is not consistent with the customs of the chase. Therefore, O
mountaineer, I will take thy life.' Thus addressed by the son of Pandu,
the Kirata, smiling replied unto his capable of wielding the bow with his
left hand, in soft words, saying, 'O hero, thou needst not be anxious on
my account. This forest land is proper abode for us who always dwell in
the woods. Respecting thyself, however, I may inquire, why thou hast
selected thy abode here amid such difficulties. We, O ascetic, have our
habitation in these woods abounding in animals of all kinds. Why dost
thou, so delicate and brought up in luxury and possessed of the splendour
of fire, dwell alone in such a solitary region?' Arjuna said, 'Depending
on the Gandiva and arrows blazing like fire, I live in this great forest,
like a second Pavaki. Thou hast seen how this monster--this terrible
Rakshasa--that came hither in the form of an animal, hath been slain by
me.' The Kirata replied, 'This Rakshasa, first struck with the shot from
my bow, was killed and sent to the regions of Yama by me. He was first
aimed at by me. And it is with my shot that he has been deprived of life.
Proud of thy strength, it behoveth thee not to impute thy own fault to
others. Thou art thyself in fault, O wretch, and, therefore, shalt not
escape from me with life. Stay thou: I will shoot at thee shafts like
thunderbolts. Strive thou also and shoot, to the best of thy power, thy
arrows at me.' Hearing these words of the Kirata, Arjuna became angry,
and attacked him with arrows. The Kirata, however, with a glad heart
received all those shafts upon himself, repeatedly saying, 'Wretch,
wretch, shoot thou best arrows capable of piercing into the very vitals.'
Thus addressed, Arjuna, began to shower his arrows on him. Both of them
then became angry and, engaging in fierce conflict, began to shoot at
each other showers of arrows, each resembling a snake of virulent poison.
And Arjuna rained a perfect shower of arrows on the Kirata, Sankara,
however, bore that downpour on him with a cheerful heart. But the wielder
of the Pinaka, having borne that shower of arrows for a moment, stood
unwounded, immovable like a hill. Dhananjaya, beholding his arrowy shower
become futile, wondered exceedingly, repeatedly saying, 'Excellent!
Excellent! Alas, this mountaineer of delicate limbs, dwelling on the
heights of the Himavat, beareth, without wavering, the shafts shot from
the Gandiva! Who is he? Is he Rudra himself, or some other god, or a
Yaksha, or an Asura? The gods sometimes do descend on the heights of the
Himavat. Except the god who wieldeth the Pinaka, there is none rise that
can bear the impetuosity of the thousands of arrows shot by me from the
Gandiva. Whether he is a god or a Yaksha, in fact, anybody except Rudra,
I shall soon send him, with my shafts, to the regions of Yama.' Thus
thinking, Arjuna, with a cheerful heart, began, O king, to shoot arrows
by hundreds, resembling in splendour the rays of the sun. That downpour
of shafts, however, the illustrious Creator of the worlds--the wielder of
the trident--bore with a glad heart, like a mountain bearing a shower of
rocks. Soon, however, the arrows of Phalguna were exhausted. And noticing
this fact, Arjuna became greatly alarmed. And the son of Pandu then began
to think of the illustrious god Agni who had before, during the burning
of the Khandava, given him a couple of inexhaustible quivers. And he
began to think, 'Alas, my arrows are all exhausted. What shall I shoot
now from my bow? Who is this person that swalloweth my arrows? Slaying
him with the end of my bow, as elephants are killed with lances, I shall
send him to the domains of the mace-bearing Yama.' The illustrious Arjuna
then, taking up his bow and dragging the Kirata with his bow-string,
struck him some fierce blows that descended like thunderbolts. When,
however, that slayer of hostile heroes--the son of Kunti--commenced the
conflict with the end of the bow, the mountaineer snatched from his hands
that celestial bow. And beholding his bow snatched from him, Arjuna took
up his sword, and wishing to end the conflict, rushed at his foe. And
then the Kuru prince, with the whole might of his arms, struck that sharp
weapon upon the head of the Kirata, a weapon that was incapable of being
resisted even by solid rocks. But that first of swords, at touch of the
Kirata's crown, broke into pieces. Phalguna then commenced the conflict
with trees and stones. The illustrious god in the form of the huge-bodied
Kirata, however, bore that shower of trees and rocks with patience. The
mighty son of Pritha then, his mouth smoking with wrath, struck the
invincible god in the form of a Kirata, with hi clenched fists, blows
that descended like thunderbolts. The god in the Kirata form returned
Phalguna's blows with fierce blows resembling the thunderbolts of Indra.
And in consequence of that conflict of blows between the son of Pandu and
the Kirata, there arose in that place loud and frightful sounds. That
terrible conflict of blows, resembling the conflict of yore between
Vritra and Vasava, lasted but for a moment. The mighty Jishnu clasping
the Kirata began to press him with his breast, but the Kirata, possessed
of great strength pressed the insensible son of Pandu with force. And in
consequence of the pressure of their arms and of their breasts, their
bodies began to emit smoke like charcoal in fire. The great god then,
smiting the already smitten son of Pandu, and attacking him in anger with
his full might, deprived him of his senses. Then, O Bharata, Phalguna,
thus pressed by the god of the gods, with limbs, besides, bruised and
mangled, became incapable of motion and was almost reduced to a ball of
flesh. And struck by the illustrious god, he became breathless and,
falling down on earth without power of moving, looked like one that was
dead. Soon, however, he regained consciousness, and, rising from his
prostrate position, with body covered with blood, became filled with
grief. Mentally prostrating himself before the gracious god of gods, and
making a clay image of that deity, he worshipped it, with offerings of
floral garlands. Beholding, however, the garland that he had offered to
the clay image of Bhava, decking the crown of the Kirata, that best of
Pandu's sons became filled with joy and regained his ease. And he
prostrated himself thereupon at the feet of Bhava, and the god also was
pleased with him. And Hara, beholding the wonder of Arjuna and seeing
that his body had been emaciated with ascetic austerities, spake unto him
in a voice deep as the roaring of the clouds, saying, 'O Phalguna, I have
been pleased with thee for thy act is without a parallel. There is no
Kshatriya who is equal to thee in courage, and patience. And, O sinless
one, thy strength and prowess are almost equal to mine. O mighty-armed
one, I have been pleased with thee. Behold me, O bull of the Bharata
race! O large-eyed one! I will grant thee eyes (to see me in my true
form). Thou wert a Rishi before. Thou wilt vanquish all thy foes, even
the dwellers of heaven; I will as I have been pleased with thee, grant
thee an irresistible weapon. Soon shall thou be able to wield that weapon
of mine."
Vaisampayana continued, "Phalguna then beheld him--Mahadeva--that god of
blazing splendour-that wielder of the Pinaka-that one who had his abode
on the mountains (of Kailasa)--accompanied by Uma. Bending down on his
knee and bowing with his head, that conqueror of hostile cities-the son
of Pritha-worshipped Hara and inclined him to grace. And Arjuna said, 'O
Kapardin, O chief of all gods, O destroyer of the eyes of Bhaga, O god of
gods, O Mahadeva, O thou of blue throat, O thou of matted locks, I know
thee as the Cause of all causes. O thou of three eyes, O lord of all!
Thou art the refuge of all the gods! This universe hath sprung from thee.
Thou art incapable of being vanquished by the three worlds of the
celestials, the Asuras, and men. Thou art Siva in the form of Vishnu, and
Vishnu in the form of Siva. Thou destroyedest of old the great sacrifice
of Daksha. O Hari, O Rudra, I bow to thee. Thou hast an eye on thy
forehead. O Sarva, O thou that rainest objects of desire, O bearer of the
trident, O wielder of the Pinaka, O Surya, O thou of pure body, O Creator
of all, I bow to thee. O lord of all created things, I worship thee to
obtain thy grace. Thou art the lord of the Ganas, the source of universal
blessing, the Cause of the causes of the universe. Thou art beyond the
foremost of male beings, thou art the highest, thou art the subtlest, O
Hara! O illustrious Sankara, it behoveth thee to pardon my fault. It was
even to obtain a sight of thyself that I came to this great mountain,
which is dear to thee and which is the excellent abode of ascetics. Thou
art worshipped of all worlds. O lord, I worship thee to obtain thy grace.
Let not this rashness of mine be regarded as a fault--this combat in
which I was engaged with thee from ignorance. O Sankara, I seek thy
protection. Pardon me all I have done."
Vaisampayana continued, "Endued with great might, the god whose sign was
the bull, taking into his the handsome hands of Arjuna, smilingly replied
unto him, saying, 'I have pardoned thee. And the illustrious Hara,
cheerfully clasping Arjuna with his arms, once more consoling Arjuna said
as follows."
