SECTION XXXVIII
(Kairata Parva)
Janemejaya said, "O illustrious one, I desire to hear in detail the
history of the acquisition of weapons by Arjuna of spotless deeds. O tell
me how that tiger among men, Dhananjaya, of mighty arms and possessed of
great energy, entered that solitary forest without fear. And, O thou
foremost of those acquainted with the Veda, what also did Arjuna do while
dwelling there? How also were the illustrious Sthanu and the chief of the
celestials gratified by him? O thou best of regenerate ones, I desire to
hear all this under thy favour. Thou art omniscient; thou knowest all
about the gods and all about men. O Brahmana, the battle that took place
of old between Arjuna--that foremost of smiters never defeated in
battle--and Bhava was highly extraordinary and without parallel. It
maketh one's hair stand on end to hear of it. Even the hearts of those
lions among men--the brave sons of Pritha--trembled in consequence of
wonder and joy and a sense of their own inferiority. O tell me in full
what else Arjuna, did I do not see even the most trivial thing to Jishnu
that is censurable. Therefore, recite to me in full the history of that
hero."
Vaisampayana said, "O tiger among Kurus, I shall recite to thee that
narration, excellent and extensive and unrivalled, in connection with the
illustrious hero. O sinless one, hear in detail the particulars about
Arjuna's meeting with the three-eyed god of gods, and his contact with
the illustrious god's person!
"At Yudhishthira's command, Dhananjaya of immeasurable prowess set out
(from Kamyaka) to obtain a sight of Sakra, the chief of the celestials
and of Sankara, the god of gods. And the strong-armed Arjuna of great
might set out armed with his celestial bow and a sword with golden hilt,
for the success of the object he had in view, northwards, towards the
summit of the Himavat. And, O king, that first of all warriors in the
three worlds, the son of Indra, with a calm mind, and firmly adhering to
his purpose, then devoted himself, without the loss of any time, to
ascetic austerities. And he entered, all alone, that terrible forest
abounding with thorny plants and trees and flowers and fruits of various
kinds, and inhabited by winged creatures of various species, and swarming
with animals of diverse kinds, and resorted to by Siddhas and Charanas.
And when the son of Kunti entered that forest destitute of human beings,
sounds of conchs and drums began to be heard in the heavens. And a thick
shower of flowers fell upon the earth, and the clouds spreading over the
firmament caused a thick shade. Passing over those difficult and woody
regions at the foot of the great mountains, Arjuna soon reached the
breast of the Himavat; and staying there for sometime began to shine in
his brilliancy. And he beheld there numerous trees with expanding
verdure, resounding with the melodious notes of winged warblers. And he
saw there rivers with currents of the lapis lazuli, broken by the fierce
eddies here and there, and echoing with the notes of swans and ducks and
cranes. And the banks of those rivers resounded with the mellifluous
strains of the male Kokilas and the notes of peacocks and cranes. And the
mighty warrior, beholding those rivers of sacred and pure and delicious
water and their charming banks, became highly delighted. And the
delighted Arjuna of fierce energy and high soul then devoted himself to
rigid austerities in that delightful and woody region. Clad in rags made
of grass and furnished with a black deerskin and a stick, he commenced to
eat withered leaves fallen upon the ground. And he passed the first
month, by eating fruits at the interval of three nights; and the second
by eating at the interval of the six nights; and the third by eating at
the interval of a fortnight. When the fourth month came, that best of the
Bharatas--the strong-armed son of Pandu--began to subsist on air alone.
With arms upraised and leaning upon nothing and standing on the tips of
his toes, he continued his austerities. And the illustrious hero's locks,
in consequence of frequent bathing took the hue of lightning or the
lotus. Then all the great Rishis went together unto the god of the Pinaka
for representing unto him about the fierce asceticism of Pritha's son.
And bowing unto that god of gods, they informed him of Arjuna's
austerities saying, 'This son of pritha possessed of great energy is
engaged in the most difficult of ascetic austerities on the breast of the
Himavat. Heated with his asceticism, the earth is smoking all round, O
god of gods. We do not know what his object is for which he is engaged in
these austerities. He, however, is causing us pain. It behoveth thee to
prevent him!' Hearing these words of those munis with souls under perfect
control, the lord of all creatures--the husband of Uma said, 'It behoveth
you not to indulge in any grief on account of Phalguna! Return ye all
cheerfully and with alacrity to the places whence ye have come. I know
the desire that is in Arjuna's heart. His wish is not for heaven, nor for
prosperity, nor for long life. And I will accomplish, even, this day, all
that is desired by him.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "The truth-speaking Rishis, having heard these
words of Mahadeva, became delighted, and returned to their respective
abodes."
