SECTION XLI
Vaisampayana said, "The wielder of the Pinaka, having the bull for his
sign, thus disappeared in the very sight of the gazing son of Pandu, like
the sun setting in the sight of the world. Arjuna, that slayer of hostile
heroes, wondered much at this, saying, 'O, I have seen the great god of
gods. 'Fortunate, indeed I am, and much favoured, for I have both beheld
and touched with my hand the three-eyed Hara the wielder of the Pinaka,
in his boon-giving form. I shall win success. I am already great. My
enemies have already been vanquished by me. My purposes have been already
achieved.' And while the son of Pritha, endued with immeasurable energy,
was thinking thus, there came to that place Varuna the god of waters,
handsome and of the splendour of the lapis lazuli accompanied by all
kinds of aquatic creatures, and filling all the points of the horizon
with a blazing effulgence. And accompanied by Rivers both male and
female, and Nagas, and Daityas and Sadhyas and inferior deities, Varuna,
the controller and lord of all aquatic creatures, arrived at that spot.
There came also the lord Kuvera of body resembling pure gold, seated on
his car of great splendour, and accompanied by numerous Yakshas. And the
lord of treasures, possessed of great beauty, came there to see Arjuna,
illuminating the firmament with his effulgence. And there came also Yama
himself, of great beauty, the powerful destroyer of all the worlds,
accompanied by those lords of the creation--the Pitris--both embodied and
disembodied. And the god of justice, of inconceivable soul, the son of
Surya, the destroyer of all creatures, with the mace in hand, came there
on his car, illuminating the three worlds with regions of the Guhyakas,
the Gandharvas and the Nagas, like a second Surya as he riseth at the end
of the Yuga. Having arrived there, they beheld, from the effulgent and
variegated summits of the great mountain, Arjuna engaged in ascetic
austerities. And there came in a moment the illustrious Sakra also,
accompanied by his queen, seated on the back of (the celestial elephant)
Airavata, and surrounded also by all the deities. And in consequence of
the white umbrella being held over his head, he looked like the moon amid
fleecy clouds. And eulogised by Gandharvas, and Rishis endued with wealth
of asceticism, the chief of the celestials alighted on a particular
summit of the mountain, like a second sun. Then Yama possessed of great
intelligence, and fully conversant with virtue, who had occupied a summit
on the south, in a voice deep as that of the clouds, said these
auspicious words, 'Arjuna, behold us, the protectors of the worlds,
arrive here! We will grant thee (spiritual) vision, for thou deservest to
behold us. Thou wert in thy former life a Rishi of immeasurable soul,
known as Nara of great might At the command, O child, of Brahma, thou
hast been born among men! O sinless one, by thee shall be vanquished in
battle the highly virtuous grandsire of the Kurus--Bhishma of great
energy--who is born of the Vasus. Thou shalt also defeat all the
Kshatriyas of fiery energy commanded by the son of Bharadwaja in battle.
Thou shalt also defeat those Danavas of fierce prowess that have been
born amongst men, and those Danavas also that are called Nivatakavachas.
And, O son of the Kuru race, O Dhananjaya, thou shalt also slay Karna of
fierce prowess, who is even a portion of my father Surya, of energy
celebrated throughout the worlds. And, O son of Kunti, smiter of all
foes, thou shalt also slay all the portions of celestials and Danavas and
the Rakshasas that have been incarnate on earth. And slain by thee, these
shall attain to the regions earned by them according to their acts. And,
O Phalguna, the fame of thy achievements will last for ever in the world:
thou hast gratified Mahadeva himself in conflict. Thou shalt, with Vishnu
himself, lighten the burden of the earth. O accept this weapon of
mine--the mace I wield incapable of being baffled by any body. With this
weapon thou wilt achieve great deeds.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "O Janamejaya, the son of Pritha then received
from Yama that weapon duly, along with the Mantras and rite, and the
mysteries of hurling and withdrawing it. Then Varuna, the lord of all
aquatic creatures, blue as the clouds, from a summit he had occupied on
the west, uttered these words, 'O son of Pritha, thou art the foremost of
Kshatriyas, and engaged in Kshatriya practices. O thou of large coppery
eyes, behold me! I am Varuna, the lord of waters. Hurled by me, my nooses
are incapable of being resisted. O son of Kunti, accept of me these
Varuna weapons along with the mysteries of hurling and withdrawing them.
With these, O hero, in the battle that ensued of your on account of
Taraka (the wife of Vrihaspati), thousands of mighty Daityas were seized
and tied. Accept them of me. Even if Yama himself by thy foe, with these
in thy hands, he will not be able to escape from thee. When thou wilt
armed with these, range over the field of battle, the land, beyond doubt,
will be destitute of Kshatriyas.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "After both Varuna and Yama had given away their
celestial weapons, the lord of treasures having his home on the heights
of Kailasa, then spake, 'O son of Pandu, O thou of great might and
wisdom, I too have been pleased with thee. And this meeting with thee
giveth me as much pleasure as a meeting with Krishna. O wielder of the
bow with the left hand, O thou of mighty arms, thou wert a god before,
eternal (as other gods). In ancient Kalpas, thou hadst every day gone
through ascetic austerities along with us. O best of men, I grant thee
celestial vision. O thou of mighty arms, thou wilt defeat even invincible
Daityas and Danavas. Accept of me also without loss of time, an excellent
weapon. With this thou wilt be able to consume the ranks of
Dhritarashtra. Take then this favourite weapon of mine called
Antarddhana. Endued with energy and prowess and splendour, it is capable
of sending the foe to sleep. When the illustrious Sankara slew Tripura,
even this was the weapon which he shot and by which many mighty Asuras
were consumed. O thou of invincible prowess I take it up for giving it to
thee. Endued with the dignity of the Meru, thou art competent to hold
this weapon.'"
"After these words had been spoken, the Kuru prince Arjuna endued with
great strength, duly received from Kuvera that celestial weapon. Then the
chief of the celestials addressing Pritha's son of ceaseless deeds in
sweet words, said, in a voice deep as that the clouds or the kettle-drum,
'O thou mighty-armed son of Kunti, thou art an ancient god. Thou hast
already achieved the highest success, and acquired the statue of a god.
But, O represser of foes, thou hast yet to accomplish the purposes of the
gods. Thou must ascend to heaven. Therefore prepare thou O hero of great
splendour! My own car with Matali as charioteer, will soon descend on the
earth. Taking thee, O Kaurava, to heaven, I will grant thee there all my
celestial weapons.'"
"Beholding those protectors of the worlds assembled together on the
heights of Himavat, Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, wondered much, Endued
with great energy, he then duly worshipped the assembled Lokapalas, with
words, water, and fruits. The celestials then returning that worship,
went away. And the gods capable of going everywhere at will, and endued
with the speed of the mind, returned to the places whence they had come."
"That bull among men--Arjuna--having obtained weapons thus, was filled
with pleasure. And he regarded himself as one whose desires had been
fulfilled and who was crowned with success."
