SECTION XLIII
Vaisampayana said, "And the city of Indra which Arjuna saw was delightful
and was the resort of Siddhas and Charanas. And it was adorned with the
flowers of every season, and with sacred trees of all kinds. And he
beheld also celestial gardens called Nandana--the favourite resort of
Apsaras. And fanned by the fragrant breezes charged with the farina of
sweet-scented flowers, the trees with their lord of celestial blossoms
seemed to welcome him amongst them. And the region was such that none
could behold it who had not gone through ascetic austerities, or who had
not poured libations on fire. It was a region for the virtuous alone, and
not for those who had turned their back on the field of battle. And none
were competent to see it who had not performed sacrifices or observed
rigid vows, or who were without a knowledge of the Vedas, or who had not
bathed in sacred waters, or who were not distinguished for sacrifices and
gifts. And none were competent to see it who were disturbers of
sacrifices, or who were low, or who drank intoxicating liquors, or who
were violators of their preceptors' bed, or who were eaters of
(unsanctified) meat, or who were wicked. And having beheld those
celestial gardens resounding with celestial music, the strong-armed son
of Pandu entered the favourite city of Indra. And he beheld there
celestial cars by thousands, capable of going everywhere at will,
stationed in proper places. And he saw tens of thousands of such cars
moving in every direction. And fanned by pleasant breezes charged with
the perfumes of flowers, the son of Pandu was praised by Apsaras and
Gandharvas. And the celestials then, accompanied by the Gandharvas and
Siddhas and great Rishis, cheerfully reverenced Pritha's son of white
deeds. Benedictions were poured upon him, accompanied by the sounds of
celestial music. The strong-armed son of Pritha then heard around him the
music of conchs and drums. And praised all around, the son of Pritha then
went, at the command of Indra, to that large and extensive starry way
called by the name of Suravithi. There he met with the Sadhyas, the
Viswas, the Marutas, the twin Aswins, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras,
the Brahmarshis of the great splendour, and numerous royal sages with
Dilipa at their head, and Tumvura and Narada, and that couple of
Gandharvas known by the names of Haha and Huhu. And the Kuru prince--that
chastiser of foes--having met and duly saluted them, last of all beheld
the chief of the celestials--the god of a hundred sacrifices. Then the
strong-armed son of Pritha, alighting from the car approached the lord
himself of the gods--his father--that chastiser of Paka. And a beautiful
white umbrella furnished with a golden staff was held over the chief of
the celestials. And he was fanned with a Chamara perfumed with celestial
scents. And he was eulogised by many Gandharvas headed by Viswavasu and
others, by bards and singers, and by foremost Brahmanas chanting Rik and
Yajus hymns. And the mighty son of Kunti, approaching Indra, saluted him
by bending his head to the ground. And Indra thereupon embraced him with
his round and plump arms. And taking his hand, Sakra made him sit by him
on a portion of his own seat, that sacred seat which was worshipped by
gods and Rishis. And the lord of the celestials-that slayer of hostile
heroes--smelt the head of Arjuna bending in humility, and even took him
upon his lap. Seated on Sakra's seat at the command of that god of a
thousand eyes, Pritha's son of immeasurable energy began to blaze in
splendour like a second Indra. And moved by affection, the slayer of
Vritra, consoling Arjuna, touched his beautiful face with his own
perfumed hands. And the wielder of the thunderbolt, patting and rubbing
gently again and again with his own hands which bore the marks of the
thunderbolt the handsome and huge arms of Arjuna which resembled a couple
of golden columns and which were hard in consequence of drawing the
bowstring and son enhanced the beauty of the assembly, like the sun and
moon god of a thousand eyes--eyeing his son of curly locks smilingly and
with eyes expanded with delight, seemed scarcely to be gratified. The
more he gazed, the more he liked to gaze on. And seated on one seat, the
father and son enhanced the beauty of the assembly, like the sun and moon
beautifying the firmament together on the fourteenth day of the dark
fortnight. And a band of Gandharvas headed by Tumvuru skilled in music
sacred and profane, sang many verses in melodious notes. And Ghritachi
and Menaka and Rambha and Purvachitti and Swayamprabha and Urvasi and
Misrakesi and Dandagauri and Varuthini and Gopali and Sahajanya and
Kumbhayoni and Prajagara and Chitrasena and Chitralekha and Saha and
Madhuraswana, these and others by thousands, possessed of eyes like lotus
leaves, who were employed in enticing the hearts of persons practising
rigid austerities, danced there. And possessing slim waists and fair
large hips, they began to perform various evolutions, shaking their deep
bosoms, and casting their glances around, and exhibiting other attractive
attitude capable of stealing the hearts and resolutions and minds of the
spectators."
