SECTION XXXVI
Vaisampayana said, "Hearing those words of Bhima, Yudhishthira. the son
of Kunti--tiger among men and slayer of all foes--began to sigh heavily,
and reflect in silence. And he thought within himself, 'I have heard
recited the duties of kings, also all truths about the duties of the
different orders. He is said to observe those duties truly who keepeth
them before his eyes, so as to regulate his conduct both in the present
and the future. Knowing as I do the true course of virtue, which, however
is so very difficult of being known, how can I forcibly grind virtue down
like grinding the mountains of Meru? Having reflected so for a moment,
and settled what he should do, he replied unto Bhima as follows without
allowing him another word:
"O thou of mighty arms, it is even so as thou hast said. But, O thou
foremost of speakers, listen now to another word I say. Whatever sinful
deeds, O Bhima, one seeketh to achieve, depending on his courage alone,
become always a source of pain. But, O thou of mighty arms, whatever is
begun with deliberation, with well-directed prowess, with all appliances,
and much previous thought, is seen to succeed. The gods themselves favour
such designs. Hear from me something about what, proud of thy might, O
Bhima, and led away by thy restlessness, thou thinkest should be
immediately begun. Bhurisravas, Sala, the mighty Jarasandha, Bhishma,
Drona, Karna, the mighty son of Drona, Dhritarashtra's sons--Duryodhana
and others--so difficult of being vanquished, are all accomplished in
arms and ever ready for battle with us. Those kings and chiefs of the
earth also who have been injured by us, have all adopted the side of the
Kauravas, and are bound by ties of affection to them. O Bharata, they are
engaged in seeking the good of Duryodhana and not of us. With full
treasures and aided by large forces, they will certainly strive their
best in battle. All the officers also of the Kuru army together with
their sons and relatives, have been honoured by Duryodhana with wealth
and luxuries. Those heroes are also much regarded by Duryodhana. This is
my certain conclusion that they will sacrifice their lives for Duryodhana
in battle. Although the behaviour of Bhishma, Drona, and the illustrious
Kripa, is the same towards us as towards them, yet, O thou of mighty
arms, this is my certain conclusion that in order to pay off the royal
favours they enjoy, they will throw their very lives, than which there is
nothing dearer, in battle. All of them are masters of celestial weapons,
and devoted to the practice of virtue. I think they are incapable of
being vanquished even by gods led by Vasava himself. There is again
amongst them that mighty warrior--Karna--impetuous, and ever wrathful,
master of all weapons, and invincible, and encased in impenetrable mail.
Without first vanquishing in battle all those foremost of men, unaided as
thou art, how canst thou slay Duryodhana? O Vrikodara, I cannot sleep
thinking of the lightness of hand of that Suta's son, who, I regard, is
the foremost of all wielders of the bow!"
"Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Yudhishthira, the
impetuous Bhima became alarmed, and forbore from speaking anything. And
while the sons of Pandu were thus conversing with each other, there came
to that spot the great ascetic Vyasa, the son of Satyavati. And as he
came, the sons of Pandu worshipped him duly. Then that foremost of all
speakers, addressing Yudhishthira, said, O, Yudhishthira, O thou of
mighty arms, knowing by spiritual insight what is passing in thy heart, I
have come to thee, O thou bull among men! The fear that is in thy heart,
arising from Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, and Karna, and Drona's son,
and prince Duryodhana, and Dussasana, I will dispell, O slayer of all
foes, by means of an act enjoined by the ordinance. Hearing it from me,
accomplish it thou with patience, and having accomplished it, O king,
quell this fever of thine soon.'"
That foremost of speakers then, the son of Parasara, taking Yudhishthira
to a corner, began to address him in words of deep import, saying, 'O
best of the Bharatas, the time is come for thy prosperity, when, indeed
Dhananjaya--that son of Pritha--will slay all thy foes in battle. Uttered
by me and like unto success personified, accept from me this knowledge
called Pratismriti that I impart to thee, knowing thou art capable of
receiving it. Receiving it (from thee), Arjuna will be able to accomplish
his desire. And let Arjuna, O son of Pandu, go unto Mahendra and Rudra,
and Varuna, and Kuvera, and Yama, for receiving weapon from them. He is
competent to behold the gods for his asceticism and prowess. He is even a
Rishi of great energy, the friend of Narayana; ancient, eternal a god
himself, invincible, ever successful, and knowing no deterioration. Of
mighty arms, he will achieve mighty deeds, having obtained weapons from
Indra, and Rudra, and the Lokapalas, O son of Kunti, think also of going
from this to some other forest that may, O king, be fit for thy abode. To
reside in one place for any length of time is scarcely pleasant. In thy
case, it might also be productive of anxiety to the ascetics. And as thou
maintainest numerous Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and the several
branches thereof, continued residence here might exhaust the deer of this
forest, and be destructive of the creepers and plants.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Having addressed him thus, that illustrious and
exalted ascetic Vyasa, of great wisdom, acquired with the mysteries of
the world, then imparted unto the willing Yudhishthira the just, who had
meanwhile purified himself, that foremost of sciences. And bidding
farewell unto the son of Kunti, Vyasa disappeared then and there. The
virtuous and intelligent Yudhishthira, however, having obtained that
knowledge carefully retained it in his mind and always recited it on
proper occasions. Glad of the advice given him by Vyasa, the son of Kunti
then, leaving the wood Dwaitavana went to the forest of Kamyaka on the
banks of the Saraswati. And, O king, numerous Brahmanas of ascetic merit
and versed in the science of orthoepy and orthography, followed him like
the Rishis following the chief of the celestials. Arrived at Kamyaka,
those illustrious bulls amongst the Bharata took up their residence there
along with their friends and attendants. And possessed of energy, those
heroes, O king, lived there for some time, devoted to the exercise of the
bow and hearing all the while the chanting of the Vedas. And they went
about those woods every day in search of deer, armed with pure arrows.
And they duly performed all the rites in honour of the Pitris, the
celestials and the Brahmanas."
