SECTION XLVIII
Janamejaya said, "These feats of Pritha's son endued with immeasurable
energy, were certainly marvellous. O Brahmana, what did Dhritarashtra of
great wisdom say, when he heard of them?"
Vaisampayana said, "Amvika's son, king Dhritarashtra, having heard of
Arjuna's arrival and stay at Indra's abode, from Dwaipayana, that
foremost of Rishis, spake unto Sanjaya, saying, 'O charioteer, dost thou
know in detail the acts of the intelligent Arjuna, of which I have heard
from beginning to end? O charioteer, my wretched and sinful son is even
now engaged in a policy of the most vulgar kind. Of wicked soul, he will
certainly depopulate the earth. The illustrious person whose words even
in jest are true, and who hath Dhananjaya to fight for him, is sure to
win the three worlds. Who that is even beyond the influence of Death and
Decay will be able to stay before Arjuna, when he will scatter his barbed
and sharp-pointed arrows whetted on stone? My wretched sons, who have to
fight with the invincible Pandavas are indeed, all doomed. Reflecting day
and night, I see not the warrior amongst us that is able to stay in
battle before the wielder of the Gandiva. If Drona, or Karna, or even
Bhishma advance against him in battle, a great calamity is likely to
befall the earth. But even in that case, I see not the way to our success
Karna is kind and forgetful. The preceptor Drona is old, and the teacher
(of Arjuna) Arjuna, however, is wrathful, and strong, and proud, and of
firm and steady prowess. As all these warriors are invincible, a terrible
fight will take place between them. All of them are heroes skilled in
weapons and of great reputation. They would not wish for the sovereignty
of the world, if it was to be purchased by defeat. Indeed, peace will be
restored only on the death of these or of Phalguna. The slayer of Arjuna,
however, existeth not, nor doth one that can vanquish him. Oh, how shall
that wrath of his which hath myself for its object be pacified. Equal
unto the chief of the celestials, that hero gratified Agni at Khandava
and vanquished all the monarchs of the earth on the occasion of the great
Rajasuya. O Sanjaya, the thunder-bolt falling on the mountain top,
leaveth a portion unconsumed; but the shafts, O child, that are shot by
Kiriti leave not a rack behind. As the rays of the sun heat this mobile
and immobile universe, so will the shafts shot by Arjuna's hands scorch
my sons. It seemeth to me that the Chamus of the Bharatas, terrified at
the clatter of Arjuna's chariot-wheels, are already broken through in all
directions. Vidhatri hath created Arjuna as an all-consuming Destroyer.
He stayeth in battle as a foe, vomitting and scattering swarms of arrows.
Who is there that will defeat him?"
