SECTION LIII
Vrihadaswa said, "There was a king named Nala, the son of Virasena. And
he was strong, and handsome, and well-versed in (the knowledge of)
horses, and possessed of every desirable accomplishment. And he was at
the head of all the kings, even like the lord of the celestials. And
exalted over all, he resembled the sun in glory. And he was the king of
the Nishadhas, intent on the welfare of the Brahmanas, versed in the
Vedas, and possessed of heroism. And he was truth-telling, fond of dice,
and the master of a mighty army. And he was the beloved of men and women,
and of great soul and subdued passions. And he was the protector (of
all), and the foremost of bowmen, and like unto Manu himself. And like
him, there was among the Vidarbhas (a king named) Bhima, of terrible
prowess, heroic and well-disposed towards his subjects and possessed of
every virtue. (But withal) he was childless. And with a fixed mind, he
tried his utmost for obtaining issue. And. O Bharata there came unto him
(once) a Brahmarshi named Damana. And, O king of kings, desirous of
having offspring, Bhima, versed in morality, with his queen gratified
that illustrious Rishi by a respectful reception. And Damana,
well-pleased, granted unto the king and his consort a boon in the form of
a jewel of a daughter, and three sons possessed of lofty souls and great
fame. (And they were called respectively) Damayanti, and Dama and Danta,
and illustrious Damana. And the three sons were possessed of every
accomplishment and terrible mien and fierce prowess. And the
slender-waisted Damayanti, in beauty and brightness, in good name and
grace and luck, became celebrated all over the world. And on her
attaining to age, hundreds of hand-maids, and female slaves, decked in
ornaments, waited upon her like Sachi herself. And Bhima's daughter of
faultless features, decked in every ornament, shone in the midst of her
hand-maids, like the luminous lightning of the clouds. And the large-eyed
damsel was possessed of great beauty like that of Sree herself. And
neither among celestials, nor among Yakshas, nor among men was anybody
possessed of such beauty, seen or heard of before. And the beautiful
maiden filled with gladness the hearts of even the gods. And that tiger
among men, Nala also had not his peer in the (three) worlds: for in
beauty he was like Kandarpa himself in his embodied form. And moved by
admiration, the heralds again and again celebrated the praises of Nala
before Damayanti and those of Damayanti before the ruler of the
Nishadhas. And repeatedly hearing of each other's virtues they conceived
an attachment towards each other not begot of sight, and that attachment,
O son of Kunti began to grow in strength. And then Nala was unable to
control the love that was in his bosom. And he began to pass much of his
time in solitude in the gardens adjoining the inner apartment (of his
palace). And there he saw a number of swans furnished with golden wings,
wandering in those woods. And from among them he caught one with his
hands. And thereupon the sky-ranging one said unto Nala. 'Deserve I not
to be slain by thee. O king. I will do something that is agreeable to
thee. O king of the Nishadhas. I will speak of thee before Damayanti in
such a way that she will not ever desire to have any other person (for
her lord).' Thus addressed, the king liberated that swan. And those swans
then rose on their wings and went to the country of the Vidarbhas. And on
arriving at the city of the Vidarbhas the birds alighted before
Damayanti, who beheld them all. And Damayanti in the midst of her maids,
beholding those birds of extraordinary appearance was filled with
delight, and strove without loss of time to catch those coursers of the
skies. And the swans at this, before that bevy of beauties, fled in all
directions. And those maidens there pursued the birds, each (running)
after one. And the swan after which Damayanti ran, having led her to a
secluded spot, addressed her in human speech, saying, O Damayanti, there
is a king amongst the Nishadhas named Nala. He is equal unto the Aswins
in beauty, not having his peer among men. Indeed, in comeliness, he is
like Kandarpa himself in his embodied form. O fair-complexioned one, O
thou of slender waist, if thou becomest his wife, thy existence and this
thy beauty may be of purpose. We have, indeed, beheld celestials and
Gandharvas, and Nagas, and Rakshasas, and men, but never saw we before
any one like Nala. Thou also art a jewel among thy sex, as Nala is the
prime among men. The union of the best with the best is happy.' Thus
addressed by the swan. Damayanti, O monarch, replied unto him there,
saying, 'Do thou speak thus unto Nala also, 'Saying So be it, to the
daughter of Vidarbha, the oviparous one, O king, returned to the country
of the Nishadhas, and related everything unto Nala."
