SECTION LXII
"Nala said, 'Surely, thy father's kingdom is as my own. But thither I
will not, by any means, repair in this extremity. Once I appeared there
in glory, increasing thy joy. How can I go there now in misery,
augmenting thy grief?'
"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Saying this again and again unto Damayanti, king
Nala, wrapped in half a garment, comforted his blessed wife. And both
attired in one cloth and wearied with hunger and thirst, in course of
their wanderings, at last they came to a sheltered shed for travellers.
And arrived at this place, the king of the Nishadhas sat down on the bare
earth with the princes of Vidarbha. And wearing the same piece of cloth
(with Damayanti), and dirty, and haggard, and stained with dust, he fell
asleep with Damayanti on the ground in weariness. And suddenly plunged in
distress, the innocent and delicate Damayanti with every mark of good
fortune, fell into a profound slumber. And, O monarch, while she slept,
Nala, with heart and mind distraught, could not slumber calmly as before.
And reflecting on the loss of his kingdom, the desertion of his friends,
and his distress in the woods, he thought with himself, 'What availeth my
acting thus? And what if I act not thus? Is death the better for me now?
Or should I desert my wife? She is truly devoted to me and suffereth this
distress for my sake. Separated from me, she may perchance wander to her
relatives. Devoted as she is to me, if she stayeth with me, distress will
surely be hers; while it is doubtful, if I desert her. On the other hand,
it is not unlikely that she may even have happiness some time.'
Reflecting upon this repeatedly, and thinking of it again and again, he
concluded, O monarch, that the desertion of Damayanti was the best course
for him. And he also thought, 'Of high fame and auspicious fortune, and
devoted to me, her husband, she is incapable of being injured by any one
on the way on account of her energy.' Thus his mind that was influenced
by the wicked Kali, dwelling upon Damayanti, was made up for deserting
her. And then thinking of his own want of clothing, and of her being clad
in a single garment, he intended to cut off for himself one half of
Damayanti's attire. And he thought, 'How shall I divide this garment, so
that my beloved one may not perceive?' And thinking of this, the royal
Nala began to walk up and down that shed. And, O Bharata, pacing thus to
and fro, he found a handsome sword lying near the shed, unsheathed. And
that repressor of foes, having, with that sword cut off one half of the
cloth, and throwing the instrument away, left the daughter of Vidharbha
insensible in her sleep and went away. But his heart failing him, the
king of the Nishadhas returned to the shed, and seeing Damayanti (again),
burst into tears. And he said, 'Alas! that beloved one of mine whom
neither the god of wind nor the sun had seen before, even she sleepeth
to-day on the bare earth, like one forlorn. Clad in this severed piece of
cloth, and lying like one distracted, how will the beauteous one of
luminous smiles behave when she awaketh? How will the beautiful daughter
of Bhima, devoted to her lord, all alone and separated from me, wander
through these deep woods inhabited by beasts and serpents? O blessed one,
may the Adityas and the Vasus, and the twin Aswins together with the
Marutas protect thee, thy virtue being thy best guard.' And addressing
thus his dear wife peerless on earth in beauty, Nala strove to go, reft
of reason by Kali. Departing and still departing, king Nala returned
again and again to that shed, dragged away by Kali but drawn back by
love. And it seemed as though the heart of the wretched king was rent in
twain, and like a swing, he kept going out from cabin and coming back
into it. At length after lamenting long and piteously, Nala stupefied and
bereft of sense by Kali went away, forsaking that sleeping wife of his.
Reft of reason through Kali's touch, and thinking of his conduct, the
king departed in sorrow, leaving his, wife alone in that solitary
forest.'"
