SECTION LXIII
Vrihadaswa said, "O king, after Nala had gone away, the beauteous
Damayanti, now refreshed, timorously awoke in that lonely forest. And O
mighty monarch, not finding her lord Naishadha, afflicted with grief and
pain, she shrieked aloud in fright, saying, 'O lord? O mighty monarch! O
husband, dost thou desert me? Oh, I am lost and undone, frightened in
this desolate place. O illustrious prince, thou art truthful in speech,
and conversant with morality. How hast thou then, having pledged thy
word, deserted me asleep in the woods? Oh, why hast thou deserted thy
accomplished wife, even devoted to thee, particularly one that hath not
wronged thee, though wronged thou hast been by others? O king of men, it
behoveth thee to act faithfull, according to those words thou hadst
spoken unto me before in the presence of the guardians of the worlds. O
bull among men, that thy wife liveth even a moment after thy desertion of
her, is only because mortals are decreed to die at the appointed time. O
bull among men, enough of this joke! O irrepressible one, I am terribly
frightened. O lord, show thyself. I see thee! I see thee, o king! Thou
art seen, O Naishadha, Hiding thyself behind those shrubs, why dost thou
not reply unto me? It is cruel of thee, O great king, that seeing me in
this plight and so lamenting, thou dost not, O king, approach and comfort
me. I grieve not for myself, nor for anything else. I only grieve to
think how thou wilt pass thy days alone, O king. In the evening oppressed
with hunger and thirst and fatigue, underneath the trees, how wilt it
take with thee when thou seest me not?' And then Damayanti, afflicted
with anguish and burning with grief, began to rush hither and thither,
weeping in woe. And now the helpless princess sprang up, and now she sank
down in stupor; and now she shrank in terror, and now she wept and wailed
aloud. And Bhima's daughter devoted to her husband, burning in anguish
and sighing ever more, and faint and weeping exclaimed, 'That being
through whose imprecation the afflicted Naishadha suffereth this woe,
shall bear grief that is greater than ours. May that wicked being who
hath brought Nala of sinless heart this, lead a more miserable life
bearing greater ills.'
"Thus lamenting, the crowned consort of the illustrious (king) began to
seek her lord in those woods, inhabited by beasts of prey. And the
daughter of Bhima, wailing bitterly, wandered hither and thither like a
maniac, exclaiming, 'Alas! Alas! Oh king!' And as she was wailing loudly
like a female osprey, and grieving and indulging in piteous lamentations
unceasingly, she came near a gigantic serpent. And that huge and hungry
serpent thereupon suddenly seized Bhima's daughter, who had come near and
was moving about within its range. And folded within serpent's coils and
filled with grief, she still wept, not for herself but for Naishadha. And
she said 'O lord, why dost thou not rush towards me, now that I am
seized, without anybody to protect me, by this serpent in these desert
wilds? And, O Naishadha, how will it fare with thee when thou rememberest
me? O lord, why hast thou gone away, deserting me today in the forest?
Free from thy course, when thou wilt have regained thy mind and senses
and wealth, how will it be with thee when thou thinkest of me? O
Naishadha, O sinless one, who will soothe thee when thou art weary, and
hungry, and fainting, O tiger among kings?' And while she was wailing
thus, a certain huntsman ranging the deep woods, hearing her
lamentations, swiftly came to the spot. And beholding the large-eyed one
in the coils of the serpent, he rushed towards it and cut off its head
with his sharp weapon. And having struck the reptile dead, the huntsman
set Damayanti free. And having sprinkled her body with water and fed and
comforted her. O Bharata, he addressed her saying, 'O thou with eyes like
those of a young gazelle, who art thou? And why also hast thou come into
the woods? And, O beauteous one, how hast thou fallen into this extreme
misery' And thus accosted, O monarch, by that man, Damayanti, O Bharata,
related unto him all that had happened. And beholding that beautiful
woman clad in half a garment, with deep bosom and round hips, and limbs
delicate and faultless, and face resembling the full moon, and eyes
graced with curved eye-lashes, and speech sweet as honey, the hunter
became inflamed with desire. And afflicted by the god of love, the
huntsman began to soothe her in winning voice and soft words. And as soon
as the chaste and beauteous Damayanti, beholding him understood his
intentions, she was filled with fierce wrath and seemed to blaze up in
anger. But the wicked-minded wretch, burning with desire became wroth,
attempted to employ force upon her, who was unconquerable as a flame of
blazing fire. And Damayanti already distressed upon being deprived of
husband and kingdom, in that hour of grief beyond utterance, cursed him
in anger, saying, 'I have never even thought of any other person than
Naishadha, therefore let this mean-minded wrath subsisting on chase, fall
down lifeless.' And as soon as she said this, the hunter fell down
lifeless upon the ground, like a tree consumed by fire." 131
