SECTION LV
"Vrihadaswa continued, 'O Bharata, Nala pledged his word to the
celestials saying, 'I will do it.' And then approaching these, he asked
with folded hands. 'Who are ye? And who also is he that desireth me to be
his messenger? And what, further, shall I have to do for you? O tell me
truly!'--When the king of the Nishadhas spoke thus, Maghavat replied,
saying, 'Know us as the immortals come hither for Damayanti's sake. I am
Indra, this one is Agni, this the lord of waters, and this, O king, is
even Yama the destroyer of the bodies of men. Do thou inform Damayanti of
our arrival, saying, 'The guardians of the world, (consisting of) the
great Indra and the others, are coming to the assembly, desirous of
beholding (the Swayamvara). The gods, Sakra and Agni and Varuna and Yama,
desire to obtain thee. Do thou, therefore, choose one of them for thy
lord.' Thus addressed by Sakra, Nala said with joined hands, 'I have come
here with the self same object. It behoveth thee not to send me (on this
errand). How can a person who is himself under the influence of love
bring himself to speak thus unto a lady on behalf of others? Therefore,
spare me, ye gods' The gods, however, said, 'O ruler of the Nishadhas,
having promised first, saying, 'I will! why wilt thou not act accordingly
now? O ruler of the Nishadhas, tell us this without delay.'
"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Thus addressed by those celestials, the ruler of
Nishadhas spake again, saying, 'Those mansions are well-guarded. How can
I hope to enter them?' Indra replied, 'Thou shalt be able to enter.' And,
saying, So be it.' Nala thereupon went to the palace of Damayanti. And
having arrived there, he beheld the daughter of the king of Vidarbha
surrounded by her hand-maids, blazing in beauty and excelling in symmetry
of form, of limbs exceedingly delicate, of slender waist and fair eyes.
And she seemed to rebuke the light of the moon by her own splendour. And
as he gazed on that lady of sweet smiles. Nala's love increased, but
desirous of keeping his truth, he suppressed his passion. And at the
sight of Naishadha, overpowered by his effulgence, those first of women
sprang up from their seats in amazement. And filled with wonder (at his
sight), they praised Nala in gladness of heart. And without saying
anything, they mentally paid him homage, 'Oh, what comeliness! Oh, what
gentleness belongeth to this high-souled one! Who is he? Is he some god
or Yaksha or Gandharva?' And those foremost of women, confounded by
Nala's splendour and bashfulness would not accost him at all in speech.
And Damayanti although herself struck with amazement, smilingly addressed
the warlike Nala who also gently smiled at her, saying, 'What art thou, O
thou of faultless features, that hast come here awakening my love? O
sinless one, O hero of celestial form, I am anxious to know who thou art
that hast come hither. And why hast thou come hither? And how is it that
thou hast not been discovered by any one, considering that my apartments
are well-guarded and the king's mandates are stern.' Thus addressed by
the daughter of the king of the Vidarbhas, Nala replied, 'O beauteous
lady, know that my name is Nala. I come here as the messenger of the
gods. The celestials, Sakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama, desire to have thee.
O beautiful lady, do thou choose one of them for thy lord. It is through
their power that I have entered here unperceived, and it is for this
reason that none saw me on my way or obstructed my entrance. O gentle
one, I have been sent by the foremost of the celestials even for this
object. Hearing this, O fortunate one, do what thou pleasest.'"
