SECTION LXX
"Vrihadaswa said, 'After a long time had passed away, a Brahmana named
Parnada returned to the city (of the Vidarbhas), and said unto the
daughter of Bhima, 'O Damayanti, seeking Nala, the king of Nishadhas, I
came to the city of Ayodhya, and appeared before the son of Bhangasura.
And, O best of women, I repeated those words of thine in the presence of
the blessed Rituparna. But hearing them neither that ruler of men, nor
his courtiers, answered anything, although I uttered them repeatedly.
Then, after I had been dismissed by the monarch, I was accosted by a
person in the service of Rituparna, named Vahuka. And Vahuka is the
charioteer of that king, of unsightly appearance and possessed of short
arms. And he is skillful in driving with speed, and well acquainted with
the culinary art. And sighing frequently, and weeping again and again, he
inquired about my welfare and afterwards said these words, 'Chaste women,
although fallen into distress, yet protect themselves and thus certainly
secure heaven. Although they may be deserted by their lords, they do not
yet become angry on that account, for women that are chaste lead their
lives, encased in the armour of virtuous behaviour. It behoveth her not
to be angry, since he that deserted her was overwhelmed with calamity,
and deprived of every bliss. A beauteous and virtuous woman should not be
angry with one that was deprived by birds of his garment while striving
to procure sustenance and who is being consumed with grief. Whether
treated well or ill, such a wife should never indulge in ire, beholding
her husband in that plight, despoiled of kingdom and destitute of
prosperity, oppressed with hunger and overwhelmed with calamity.' Hearing
these words of his, I have speedily come here. Thou hast now heard all.
Do what thou thinkest proper, and inform the king of it.'
"O king, having heard these words of Parnada, Damayanti with tearful eyes
came to her mother, and spake unto her in private, 'O mother, king Bhima
should not, by any means, be made acquainted with my purpose. In thy
presence will I employ that best of Brahmanas, Sudeva! If thou desirest
my welfare, act in such a way that king Bhima may not know my purpose.
Let Sudeva without delay go hence to the city of Ayodhya, for the purpose
of bringing Nala, O mother, having performed the same auspicious rites by
virtue of which he had speedily brought me into the midst of friends.'
With these words, after Parnada had recovered from fatigue, the princess
of Vidarbha worshipped him with profuse wealth and also said, 'When Nala
will come here, O Brahmana, I will bestow on thee wealth in abundance
again. Thou hast done me the immense service which none else, indeed, can
do me, for, (owing to that service of thine), O thou best of the
regenerate ones, I shall speedily regain my (lost) lord.' And thus
addressed by Damayanti, that high-minded Brahmana comforted her, uttering
benedictory words of auspicious import, and then went home, regarding his
mission to have been successful. And after he had gone away, Damayanti
oppressed with grief and distress, calling Sudeva, addressed him, O
Yudhishthira, in the presence of her mother, saying, 'O Sudeva, go thou
to the city of Ayodhya, straight as a bird, and tell king Rituparna
living there, these words: 'Bhima's daughter, Damayanti will hold another
Swayamvara. All the kings and princes are going thither. Calculating the
time, I find that the ceremony will take place tomorrow. O represser of
foes, if it is possible for thee, go thither without delay. Tomorrow,
after the sun hath risen, she will choose a second husband, as she doth
not know whether the heroic Nala liveth or not. And addressed by her, O
monarch thus, Sudeva set out. And he said unto Rituparna, all that he had
been directed to say.'"
