SECTION LXXIII
"Vrihadaswa said, 'After Rituparna of prowess incapable of being baffled
had, in the evening, arrived at the city of the Vidarbhas, the people
brought unto king Bhima the tidings (of his arrival). And at the
invitation of Bhima, the king (of Ayodhya) entered the city of Kundina,
filling with the rattle of his car all the ten points, direct and
transverse, of the horizon. And the steeds of Nala that were in that city
heard that sound, and hearing it they became delighted as they used to be
in the presence of Nala himself. And Damayanti also heard the sound of
that car driven by Nala, like the deep roar of the clouds in the rainy
season. And Bhima and the steeds (of Nala) regarded the clatter of that
car to be like that which they used to hear in days of yore when king
Nala himself urged his own steeds. And the peacocks on the terraces, and
the elephants in the stables, and the horses also, all heard the rattle
of Rituparna's car. And hearing the sound, so like the roar of the
clouds, the elephants and the peacocks, O king, began to utter their
cries, facing that direction, and filled with delight such as they
experience when they hear the actual roar of the clouds. And Damayanti
said, 'Because the rattle of his car filling the whole earth, gladdens my
heart, it must be King Nala (that has come). If I do not see Nala, of
face bright as the moon, that hero with countless virtues, I shall
certainly die. If I am not clasped today in that hero's thrilling
embrace, I shall certainly cease to be. If Naishadha with voice deep as
that of the clouds doth not come to me today, I shall enter into a pyre
of golden brilliance. If that foremost of kings, powerful as a lion and
gifted with the strength of an infuriated elephant, doth not present
himself before me, I shall certainly cease to live. I do not remember a
single untruth in him, or a single wrong done by him to others. Never
hath he spoken an untruth even in jest. Oh, my Nala is exalted and
forgiving and heroic and magnificent and superior to all other kings, and
faithful to his marriage vow and like unto a eunuch in respect of other
females. Night and day dwelling upon his perceptions, my heart, in
absence of that dear one, is about to burst in grief.'
"Thus bewailing as if devoid of sense, Damayanti, O Bharata, ascended the
terrace (of her mansion) with the desire of seeing the righteous Nala.
And in the yard of the central mansion she beheld king Rituparna on the
car with Varshneya and Vahuka. And Varshneya and Vahuka, descending for
that excellent vehicle, unyoked the steeds, and kept the vehicle itself
in a proper place. And king Rituparna also, descending from the car,
presented himself before king Bhima possessed of terrible prowess. And
Bhima received him with great respect, for in the absence of a proper
occasion, a great person cannot be had (as a guest). And honoured by
Bhima, king Rituparna looked about him again and again, but saw no traces
of the Swayamvara. And the ruler of the Vidarbhas, O Bharata, approaching
Rituparna, said, 'Welcome! What is the occasion of this thy visit?' And
king Bhima asked this without knowing that Rituparna had come to obtain
the hand of his daughter. And king Rituparna, of unbaffled prowess and
gifted with intelligence, saw that there were no other kings or princes.
Nor did he hear any talk relating to the Swayamvara, nor saw any
concourse of Brahmanas. And at this, the king of Kosala reflected a while
and at length said, 'I have come here to pay my respects to thee.' And
the king Bhima was struck with astonishment, and reflected upon the
(probable) cause of Rituparna's coming, having passed over a hundred
yojanas. And he reflected, 'That passing by other sovereigns, and leaving
behind him innumerable countries, he should come simply to pay his
respect to me is scarcely the reason of his arrival. What he assigneth to
be the cause of his coming appeareth to be a trifle. However, I shall
learn the true reason in the future.' And although king Bhima thought so,
he did not dismiss Rituparna summarily, but said unto him again and
again, 'Rest, thou art weary.' And honoured thus by the pleased Bhima,
king Rituparna was satisfied, and with a delighted heart, he went to his
appointed quarters followed by the servants of the royal household."
"Vrihadaswa continued, 'And, O king, after Rituparna had gone away with
Varshneya, Vahuka took the car to the stables. And there freeing the
steeds, and tending them according to rule, and soothing them himself,
sat down on a side of the car. Meanwhile, the princess of Vidharva,
Damayanti, afflicted with grief, having beheld the royal son of
Bhangasura, and Varshneya of the Suta race, and also Vahuka in that
guise, asked herself, 'Whose is this car-rattle? It was loud as that of
Nala, but I do not see the ruler of the Nishadhas. Certainly, Varshneya
hath learnt the art from Nala, and it is for this the rattle of the car
driven by him hath been even like that of Nala. Or, is Rituparna equally
skilled with Nala so that the rattle of his car seemeth to be like that
of Nala?' And reflecting thus, O monarch, the blessed and beauteous girl
sent a female messenger in search of Nishada."
