SECTION LXXI
"Vrihadaswa continued, 'Having heard the words of Sudeva king Rituparna,
soothing Vahuka with gentle words, said, 'O Vahuka, thou art well-skilled
in training and guiding horses. If it pleases thee, I intend to go to
Damayanti's Swayamvara in course of a single day.' Thus addressed, O son
of Kunti, by that king, Nala felt his heart to be bursting in grief. And
the high-souled king seemed to burn in sorrow. And he thought within
himself, 'Perhaps Damayanti in doing this is blinded by sorrow. Or,
perhaps, she hath conceived this magnificent scheme for my sake. Alas,
cruel is the deed that the innocent princess of Vidarbha intends to do,
having been deceived by my sinful and low self of little sense. It is
seen in the world that the nature of woman is inconstant. My offence also
hath been great; perhaps she is acting so, because she hath no longer any
love for me owing to my separation from her. Indeed, that girl of slender
waist, afflicted with grief on my account and with despair, will not
certainly do anything of the kind, when especially, she is the mother of
offspring (by me). However whether this is true or false, I shall
ascertain with certitude by going thither. I will, therefore, accomplish
Rituparna's and my own purpose also.' Having resolved thus in his mind,
Vahuka, with his heart in sorrow, spake unto king Rituparna, with joined
hands, saying, 'O monarch, I bow to thy behest, and, O tiger among men, I
will go to the city of the Vidarbhas in a single day. O king!' Then, O
monarch, at the command of the royal son of Bhangasura, Vahuka went to
the stables and began to examine the horses. And repeatedly urged by
Rituparna to make haste, Vahuka after much scrutiny and careful
deliberation, selected some steeds that were lean-fleshed, yet strong and
capable of a long journey and endued with energy and strength of high
breed and docility, free from inauspicious marks, with wide nostrils and
swelling cheeks, free from faults as regards the ten hairy curls, born in
(the country of) Sindhu, and fleet as the winds. And seeing those horses,
the king said somewhat angrily, 'What is this, that thou wishest to do?
Thou shouldst not jest with us. How can these horses of mine, weak in
strength and breath, carry us? And how shall we be able to go this long
way by help of these?' Vahuka replied, 'Each of these horses bears one
curl on his forehead, two on his temples, four on his sides, four on his
chest, and one on his back. Without doubt, these steeds will be able to
go to the country of the Vidarbhas. If, O king, thou thinkest of choosing
others, point them out and I shall yoke them for thee.' Rituparna
rejoined, 'O Vahuka, thou art versed in the science of horses and art
also skillful (in guiding them). Do thou speedily yoke those that thou
thinkest to be able.' Thereupon the skillful Nala yoked upon the car four
excellent steeds of good breed that were, besides, docile and fleet. And
after the steeds had been yoked, the king without loss of time mounted
upon the car, when those best of horses fell down upon the ground on
their knees. Then, O king, that foremost of men, the blessed king Nala
began to soothe horses endued with energy and strength. And raising them
up with the reins and making the charioteer Varshneya sit on the car, he
prepared to set out with great speed. And those best of steeds, duly
urged by Vahuka, rose to the sky, confounding the occupant of the
vehicle. And beholding those steeds gifted with the speed of the wind
thus drawing the car, the blessed king of Ayodhaya was exceedingly
amazed. And noticing the rattle of the car and also the management of the
steeds, Varshneya reflected upon Vahuka's skill in guiding horses. And he
thought, 'Is he Matali, the charioteer of the king of the celestials? I
find the same magnificent indications in the heroic Vahuka. Or, hath
Salihotra versed in the science of horses taken this human shape so
beautiful? Or, is it king Nala the reducer of hostile towns that hath
come here? Or, it may be that this Vahuka knoweth the science that Nala
knoweth, for I perceive that the knowledge of Vahuka is equal to that of
Nala. Further, Vahuka and Nala are of the same age. This one, again, may
not be Nala of high prowess, but somebody of equal knowledge. Illustrious
persons, however, walk this earth in disguise in consequence of
misfortune, or agreeably to the ordinance of the scriptures. That this
person is of unsightly appearance need not change my opinion; for Nala, I
think, may even be despoiled of his personal features. In respect of age
this one equals Nala. There is difference, however, in personal
appearance. Vahuka, again is endued with every accomplishment. I think,
therefore, he is Nala.' Having thus reasoned long in his mind, O mighty
monarch, Varshneya, the (former) charioteer of the righteous Nala, became
absorbed in thought. And that foremost of kings Rituparna, also,
beholding the skill of Vahuka in equestrian science experienced great
delight, along with his charioteer Varshneya. And thinking of Vahuka's
application and ardour and the manner of his holding the reins, the king
felt exceedingly glad.'"
