SECTION LXIX
"Sudeva said, 'There is a virtuous and illustrious ruler of the
Vidarbhas, Bhima by name. This blessed lady is his daughter, and widely
known by the name of Damayanti. And there is a king ruling the Nishadhas,
named Nala, the son of Virasena. This blessed lady is the wife of that
wise and righteous monarch. Defeated at dice by his brother, and
despoiled of his kingdom, that king, accompanied by Damayanti, went away
without the knowledge of any one. We have been wandering over the whole
earth in search of Damayanti. And that girl is at last found in the house
of thy son. No woman existeth that is her rival in beauty. Between the
eye-brows of this ever-youthful damsel, there is an excellent mole from
birth, resembling a lotus. Noticed by us (before) it seems to have
disappeared, covered, (as her forehead is) with (a coat of) dust even
like the moon hid in clouds. Placed there by the Creator himself as an
indication of prosperity and wealth, that mole is visible faintly, like
the cloud-covered lunar crescent of the first day of the lighted
fortnight. And covered as her body is with dust, her beauty hath not
disappeared. Though careless of her person, it is still manifest, and
shineth like gold. And this girl--goddess-like--capable of being
identified by this form of hers and that mole, hath been discovered by me
as one discovereth a fire that is covered, by its heat!'
"O king, hearing these words of Sudeva, Sunanda washed the dust that
covered the mole between Damayanti's eye-brows. And thereupon it became
visible like the moon in the sky, just emerged from the clouds. And
seeing that mole, O Bharata, Sunanda and the queen-mother began to weep,
and embracing Damayanti stood silent for a while. And the queen-mother,
shedding tears as she spoke, said in gentle accents, 'By this thy mole, I
find that thou art the daughter of my sister. O beauteous girl, thy
mother and I are both daughters of the high-souled Sudaman, the ruler of
the Dasarnas. She was bestowed upon king Bhima, and I on Viravahu. I
witnessed thy birth at our father's palace in the country of the
Dasarnas. O beautiful one, my house is to thee even as thy father's. And
this wealth, O Damayanti, is thine as much as mine.' As this, O king,
Damayanti bowing down to her mother's sister with a glad heart, spake
unto her these words, 'Unrecognised, I have still lived happily with
thee, every want of mine satisfied and myself cared for by thee. And
happy as my stay hath been, it would, without doubt, be happier still.
But, mother, I have long been an exile. It behoveth thee, therefore, to
grant me permission (to depart). My son and daughter, sent to my father's
palace, are living there. Deprived of their father, and of their mother
also, how are they passing their days stricken with sorrow. If thou
wishest to do what is agreeable to me, do thou without loss of time,
order a vehicle, for I wish to go to the Vidarbhas.' At this, O king, the
sister to (Damayanti's) mother, with a glad heart, said, 'So be it'. And
the queen-mother with her son's permission, O chief of the Bharatas, sent
Damayanti in handsome litter carried by men, protected by a large escort
and provided with food and drink and garments of the first quality. And
soon enough she reached the country of the Vidarbhas. And all her
relatives, rejoicing (in her arrival) received her with respect. And
seeing her relatives, her children, both her parents, and all her maids,
to be well, the illustrious Damayanti, O king, worshipped the gods and
Brahmanas according to the superior method. And the king rejoiced at
beholding his daughter gave unto Sudeva a thousand kine and much wealth
and a village. And, O king, having spent that night at her father's
mansion and recovered from fatigue, Damayanti addressed her mother,
saying, 'O mother, if thou wishest me to live, I tell thee truly, do thou
endeavour to bring Nala, that hero among men.' Thus addressed by
Damayanti, the venerable queen became filled with sorrow. And bathed in
tears, she was unable to give any answer. And beholding her in that
plight, all the inmates of the inner apartments broke out into
exclamation of 'Oh!' And 'Alas'! and began to cry bitterly. And then the
queen addressed the mighty monarch Bhima, saying, 'Thy daughter Damayanti
mourneth on account of her husband. Nay, banishing away all bashfulness,
she hath herself, O king, declared her mind to me. Let thy men strive to
find out (Nala) the righteous.' Thus informed by her the king sent the
Brahmanas under him in all directions, saying, 'Exert ye to discover
Nala.' And those Brahmanas, commanded by the ruler of the Vidarbhas (to
seek Nala) appeared before Damayanti and told her of the journey they
were about to undertake. And Bhima's daughter spake unto them saying, 'Do
ye cry in every realm and in every assembly, 'O beloved gambler, where
hast thou gone cutting off half of my garment, and deserting the dear and
devoted wife asleep in the forest? And that girl, as commanded by thee
stayeth expecting thee, clad in half a piece of cloth and burning with
grief! O king, O hero, relent towards, and answer, her who incessantly
weepeth for that grief. This and more ye will say, so that he may be
inclined to pity me. Assisted by the wind, fire consumeth the forest.
(Further, ye will say that) the wife is always to be protected and
maintained by the husband. Why then, good as thou art and acquainted with
every duty, hast thou neglected both the duties? Possessed of fame and
wisdom, and lineage, and kindness, why hast thou be unkind? I fear, this
is owing to the loss of my good luck! Therefore, O tiger among men, have
pity on me. O bull among men! I have heard it from thee that kindness is
the highest virtue. Speaking so, if anybody answereth you, that person
should by all means, be known, and ye should learn who he is, and where
he dwelleth. And ye foremost of regenerate ones, do ye bring me the words
of him who hearing this your speech will chance to answer. Ye should also
act with such care that no one may know the words ye utter to be at my
command, nor that ye will come back to me. And ye should also learn
whether that answers is wealthy, or poor, or destitute of power, in fact
all about him.'
"Thus instructed by Damayanti, O king, the Brahmanas set out in all
directions in search of Nala overtaken with such disaster. And the
Brahmanas, O king, searched for him in cities and kingdoms and villages,
and retreats of ascetics, and places inhabited by cow-herds. And, O
monarch, wherever they went they recited the speeches that Damayanti had
directed them to do."
