SECTION LXXIV
"Damayanti said, 'O Kesini, go thou and learn who that charioteer is that
sitteth by the car, unsightly and possessed of short arms. O blessed one,
O faultless one, approaching him, cautiously and with suit words, make
thou the usual inquiries of courtesy and learn all particulars truly.
Having regard to the feeling of satisfaction my mind experienceth, and
the delight my heart feeleth, I am greatly afraid this one is king Nala
himself. And, O faultless one, having inquired after his welfare, thou
shalt speak unto him the words of Parnada. And, O beauteous one,
understand the reply he may make thereto.' Thus instructed, that female
messenger, going cautiously, while the blessed Damayanti watched from the
terrace, addressed Vahuka in these words, 'O foremost of men, thou art
welcome. I wish thee happiness. O bull among men, hear now the words of
Damayanti. When did ye all set out, and with what object have ye come
hither. Tell us truly, for the princess of Vidarbha wisheth to hear it.'
Thus addressed, Vahuka answered, the illustrious king of Kosala had heard
from a Brahmana that a second Swayamvara of Damayanti would take place.
And hearing it, he hath come here, by the help of excellent steeds fleet
as the wind and capable of going a hundred yojanas. I am his charioteer.
Kesini then asked, 'Whence doth the third among you come, and whose (son)
is he? And whose son art thou, and how hast thou come to do this work?'
Thus questioned, Vahuka replied, 'He (of whom thou inquirest) was the
charioteer of the virtuous Nala, and known to all by the name of
Varshneya. After Nala had, O beauteous one, left his kingdom, he came to
the son of Bhangasura. I am skilled in horse-lore, and have, therefore,
been appointed as charioteer. Indeed, king Rituparna hath himself chosen
me as his charioteer and cook.' At this Kesini rejoined, 'Perhaps
Varshneya knoweth where king Nala hath gone, and O Vahuka, he may also
have spoken to thee (about his master).' Vahuka then said, 'Having
brought hither the children of Nala of excellent deeds, Varshneya went
away whither he listed: He doth not know where Naishadha is. Nor, O
illustrious one, doth anybody else know of Nala's whereabouts; for the
king (in calamity) wandereth over the world in disguise and despoiled of
(his native) beauty. Nala's self only knoweth Nala. Nala never
discovereth his marks of identity anywhere.' Thus addressed, Kesini
returned, 'The Brahmana that had before this gone to Ayodhya, had
repeatedly said these words suitable to female lips, 'O beloved gambler,
where hast thou gone cutting off half my piece of cloth, and deserting
me, his dear and devoted wife asleep in the woods? And she herself, as
commanded by him, waiteth expecting him clad in half a garment and
burning day and night in grief. O king, O hero, do thou relent towards
her that weepeth ceaselessly for that calamity and do thou give her an
answer. O illustrious one, do thou speak the words agreeable to her for
the blameless one panteth to hear them. Hearing these words of the
Brahmana thou didst formerly give a reply! The princess of Vidarbha again
wisheth to hear the words thou didst then say.'"
"Vrihadaswa continued, 'O son of the Kuru race, hearing these words of
Kesini, Nala's heart was pained, and his eyes filled with tears. And
repressing his sorrow, the king who was burning in grief, said again
these words, in accents choked with tears: 'Chaste women, though
overtaken by calamity, yet protect themselves, and thereby secure heaven.
Women that are chaste, deserted by their lords, never become angry, but
continue to live, cased in virtue's mail. Deserted by one fallen into
calamity, bereft of sense, and despoiled of bliss, it behoveth her not to
be angry. A virtuous lady should not be angry with one that was deprived
by birds of his garment while striving to procure sustenance and who is
burning in misery. Whether treated well or ill she would never be angry,
seeing her husband in that plight, despoiled of his kingdom, bereft of
prosperity, oppressed with hunger, and overwhelmed with calamity.' And, O
Bharata, while speaking thus, Nala oppressed with grief, could not
restrain his tears, but began to weep. And thereupon Kesini went back to
Damayanti, and acquainted her with everything about that conversation as
well as that outburst of grief."
