SECTION LXXVII
"Vrihadaswa said, 'Having passed that night, king Nala decked in
ornaments and with Damayanti by his side, presented himself in due time
before the king. And Nala saluted his father-in-law with becoming
humility and after him the fair Damayanti paid her respects to her
father. And the exalted Bhima, with great joy, received him as a son, and
honouring him duly along with his devoted wife, comforted them in proper
words. And duly accepting the homage rendered unto him, king Nala offered
his father-in-law his services as became him. And seeing Nala arrived,
the citizens were in great joy. And there arose in the city a loud uproar
of delight. And the citizens decorated the city with flags and standards
and garlands of flowers. And the streets were watered and decked in
floral wreaths and other ornaments. And at their gates citizens piled
flowers, and their temples and shrines were all adorned with flowers. And
Rituparna heard that Vahuka had already been united with Damayanti. And
the king was glad to hear of all this. And calling unto him king Nala, he
asked his forgiveness. And the intelligent Nala also asked Rituparna's
forgiveness, showing diverse reasons. And that foremost of speakers
versed in the truth, king Rituparna, after being thus honoured by Nala,
said, with a countenance expressive of wonder, these words unto the ruler
of the Nishadhas. 'By good fortune it is that regaining the company of
thy own wife, thou hast obtained happiness. O Naishadha, while dwelling
in disguise at my house, I hope I did not wrong thee in any way, O lord
of the earth! If knowingly I have done thee any wrong, it behoveth thee
to forgive me.' Hearing this, Nala replied, 'Thou hast not, O monarch,
done me ever so little an injury. And if thou hast, it hath not awakened
my ire, for surely thou shouldst be forgiven by me. Thou wert formerly my
friend, and, O ruler of men, thou art also related to me. Henceforth I
shall find greater delight in thee. O king, with all my desires
gratified, I lived happily in thy abode, in fact more happily there than
in my own house. This thy horse-lore is in my keeping. If thou wishest, O
king, I will make it over to thee.' Saying this, Naishadha gave unto
Rituparna that science and the latter took it with the ordained rites.
And, O monarch, the royal son of Bhangasura, having obtained the
mysteries of equestrian science and having given unto the ruler of the
Naishadhas the mysteries of dice, went to his own city, employing another
person for his charioteer. And, O king, after Rituparna had gone, king
Nala did not stay long in the city of Kundina!'"
