SECTION LXXIX
"Vrihadaswa said, 'After the festivities had commenced in the city that
was full of joy and without anxiety of any kind, the king with a large
force brought Damayanti (from her father's home). And her father, too,
that slayer of hostile heroes, Bhima of terrible prowess and immeasurable
soul, sent his daughter, having honoured her duly. And upon the arrival
of the princess of Vidarbha accompanied by her son and daughter, king
Nala began to pass his days in joy like the chief of the celestials in
the gardens of Nandana. And the king of undying fame, having regained his
kingdom and becoming illustrious among monarchs of the island of Jamvu,
began once more to rule it. And he duly performed numerous sacrifices
with abundant gifts to Brahmanas. O great king, thou also wilt with thy
kindred and relatives, so blaze forth in effulgence soon. For, O foremost
of men, it was thus that subjugator of hostile cities, king Nala, had
fallen into distress along with his wife, in consequence, O bull of
Bharata race of dice. And, O lord of the earth, Nala suffered such dire
woe all alone and recovered his prosperity, whereas thou, O son of Pandu,
with heart fixed on virtue, art sporting in joy in this great forest,
accompanied by thy brothers and Krishna. When thou art also, O monarch,
mixing daily with blessed Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and their
branches, thou hast little cause for sorrow. This history, besides, of
the Naga Karkotaka, of Damayanti, of Nala and of that royal sage
Rituparna, is destructive of evil. And, O thou of unfading glory, this
history, destructive of the influence of Kali, is capable, O king, of
comforting persons like thee when they listen to it. And reflecting upon
the uncertainty (of success) of human exertion, it behoveth thee not to
joy or grieve at prosperity or adversity. Having listened to this
history, be comforted, O king, and yield not to grief. It behoveth thee
not, O great king, to pine under calamity. Indeed, men of
self-possession, reflecting upon the caprice of destiny and the
fruitlessness of exertion, never suffer themselves to be depressed. They
that will repeatedly recite this noble history of Nala, and that will
hear it recited, will never be touched by adversity. He that listeneth to
this old and excellent history hath all his purposes crowned with success
and, without doubt, obtaineth fame, besides sons and grandsons and
animals, a high position among men, and health, and joy. And, O king, the
fear also that thou entertainest, viz., (Some one skilled in dice will
summon me), I will for once dispel. O thou of invincible prowess, I know
the science of dice in its entirety. I am gratified with thee; take this
lore, O son of Kunti, I will tell unto thee.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "King Yudhishthira then, with a glad heart, said
unto Vrihadaswa, 'O illustrious one, I desire to learn the science of
dice from thee.' The Rishi then gave his dice-lore unto the high-souled
son of Pandu, and having given it unto him, that great ascetic went to
the sacred waters of Hayasirsha for a bath.
"And after Vrihadaswa had gone away, Yudhishthira of firm vows heard from
Brahmanas and ascetics that came to him from various directions and from
places of pilgrimage and mountains and forests that Arjuna of high
intelligence and capable of drawing the bow with his left hand, was still
engaged in the austerest of ascetic penances, living upon air alone. And
he heard that the mighty-armed Partha was engaged in such fierce
asceticism that none else before him had ever been engaged in such
penances. And Dhananjaya, the son of Pritha, engaged in ascetic
austerities with regulated vows and fixed mind and observing the vow of
perfect silence, was, he heard, like the blazing god of justice himself
in his embodied form. And, O king, (Yudhishthira) the son of Pandu
hearing that his dear brother Jaya, the son of Kunti, was engaged in such
asceticism in the great forest, began to grieve for him. And with a heart
burning in grief, the eldest son of Pandu, seeking consolation in that
mighty forest held converse with the Brahmanas possessed of various
knowledge who were living with him there."
