SECTION LXXXI
Vaisampayana said, "Hearing these words of his brothers as also of
Krishna, all of whom were anxious on account of Dhananjaya, king
Yudhishthira, the just, became melancholy. And at that time he saw
(before him) the celestial Rishi Narada blazing with Brahmi beauty and
like unto a fire flaming up in consequence of sacrificial libation. And
beholding him come, king Yudhishthira with his brothers stood up and duly
worshipped the illustrious one. And endued with blazing energy, the
handsome chief of the Kuru race, surrounded by his brothers, shone like
the god of a hundred sacrifices encircled by the celestials. And
Yajnaseni in obedience to the dictates of morality adhered to her lords,
the sons of Pritha, like Savitri to the Vedas or the rays of the Sun to
the peak of Meru. And the illustrious Rishi Narada, accepting that
worship, comforted the son of Dharma in proper terms. And, O sinless one,
addressing the high-souled king Yudhishthira, the just, the Rishi said,
'Tell me, O foremost of virtuous men, what it is that thou seekest and
what I can do for thee. At this, the royal son of Dharma bowing with his
brothers unto Narada, who was the revered of the celestials, told him
with joined hands, 'O thou that art highly blessed and worshipped by all
the worlds when thou art gratified with me, I regard all my wishes in
consequence of thy grace, as already fulfilled, O thou of excellent vows!
If, O sinless one, I with my brothers deserve thy favour, it behoveth
thee, O best of Munis, to dispel the doubt that is in my mind. It
behoveth thee to tell me in detail what merit is his that goeth round the
worlds, desirous of beholding the sacred waters and shrines that are on
it.'"
"Narada said, 'Listen, O king, with attention, to what the intelligent
Bhishma had heard before from Pulastya! Once, O blessed one, that
foremost of virtuous men, Bhishma, while in the observance of the Pitrya
vow, lived, O king, in the company of Munis in a delightful and sacred
region, near the source of the Ganga, that is resorted to by the
celestial Rishis and Gandharvas and the celestials themselves. And while
living there, the resplendent one gratified with his oblations the
Pitris, the gods and the Rishis, according to the rites inculcated in the
scriptures. And once on a time while the illustrious one was engaged in
his silent recitations, he beheld Pulastya--that best of Rishis, of
wonderful appearance. And beholding that austere ascetic blazing with
beauty, he was filled with great delight and exceeding wonder. And, O
Bharata, that foremost of virtuous men, Bhishma, then worshipped that
blessed Rishi according to the rites of the ordinance. And purifying
himself and with rapt attention, he approached that best of Brahmarshis,
with the Arghya on his head. And uttering aloud his name, he said, 'O
thou of excellent vow, blessed be thou, I am Bhishma, thy slave. At sight
of thee, I am freed from all my sins.' And saying this, that foremost of
virtuous men, Bhishma, restraining speeches stood, O Yudhishthira, in
silence and with joined hands. And beholding Bhishma that foremost of the
Kurus, reduced and emaciated by the observance of vows and the study of
the Vedas, the Muni became filled with joy."
