SECTION XC
"Dhaumya continued, 'O tiger among kings, I shall now describe those
tirthas and sacred spots that lie to the north. Do thou, O exalted one,
listen to me attentively. By hearing this narration, O hero, one
acquireth a reverential frame of mind, which conduceth to much good. In
that region is the highly sacred Saraswati abounding in tirthas and with
banks easy of descent. There also, O son of Pandu, is the ocean-going and
impetuous Yamuna, and the tirtha called Plakshavatarana, productive of
high merit and prosperity. It was there that the regenerate ones having
performed the Saraswata sacrifice, bathed on the completion there of. O
sinless one, is the well-known celestial tirtha called Agnisiras, which
is productive of great merit. There king Sahadeva had celebrated a
sacrifice measuring out the ground by a throw of the Samya. It is for
this reason, O Yudhishthira, that Indra sang the praises of Sahadeva in
verse. Those verses are still current in this world, being recited by the
regenerate ones, e. g., on the Yamuna Sahadeva worshipped the sacrificial
fire, with gifts in a hundred thousands to Brahmanas. There the
illustrious king, the imperial Bharata, performed five and thirty
horse-sacrifices. O child, we have heard that Sarabhanga of yore used to
fully gratify the desires of the regenerate ones. There in this region is
his celebrated asylum productive of great merit. In that region also, O
son of Pritha, is the river Saraswati, which is ever worshipped by the
god, where, in days of yore, the Valikhilyas, O great king, performed
sacrifices. In that region also, O Yudhishthira, is the well-known river
Drisadwati, which is productive of great merit. Then, O chief of men, are
Nyagrodhakhya, and Panchalya, and Punyaka and Dalbhyaghosha, and Dalbhya,
which are, O son of Kunti, the sacred asylum in the world of illustrious
Anandayasas of excellent vows and great energy, and which are celebrated
over the three worlds. Here also, O lord of men, the illustrious Etavarna
and Avavarana versed in the Vedas, learned in Vedic lore, and proficient
in the knowledge of Vedic rites, performed meritorious sacrifices, O
chief of the Bharata race! There also is Visakhayupa to which, in days of
yore, came the gods with Varuna and Indra, and practised ascetic
austerities. And therefore is that spot so eminently sacred. Here also is
Palasaka, where the great and illustrious and highly blessed Rishi
Jamadagni performed sacrifices. There all the principal rivers in their
embodied forms taking their respective waters stood surrounding that best
of sages. And there also, O monarch, Vibhavasu (fire) himself, beholding
that high-souled one's initiation, sang the following sloka: 'The river
coming to the illustrious Jamadagni while sacrificing unto the gods
gratified the Brahmanas with offerings of honey.' O Yudhishthira, the
spot where Ganga rusheth past, cleaving the foremost of mountains which
is frequented by Gandharvas and Yakshas and Rakshasas and Apsaras, and
inhabited by hunters, and Kinnaras, is called Gangadwara. O king,
Sanatkumara regardeth that spot visited by Brahmarshis, as also the
tirtha Kanakhala (that is near to it), as sacred. There also is the
mountain named Puru which is resorted to by great Rishis and where
Pururavas was born, and Bhrigu practised ascetic austerities. For this it
is, O king, that asylum hath become known as the great peak of
Bhrigutunga. Near that peak is the sacred and extensive Vadari, that
highly meritorious asylum, famed over the three worlds, of him, O bull of
the Bharata race, who is the Present, the Past and the Future, who is
called Narayana and the lord Vishnu, who is eternal and the best of male
beings, and who is pre-eminently illustrious. Near Vadari, the cool
current of Ganga was formerly warm, and the banks there were overspread
with golden sands. There the gods and Rishis of high fortune and
exceeding effulgence, approaching the divine lord Narayana, always
worship him. The entire universe with all its tirthas and holy spots is
there where dwelleth the divine and eternal Narayana, the Supreme soul,
for he is Merit, he is the Supreme Brahma, he is tirtha, he is the
ascetic retreat, he is the First, he is the foremost of gods, and he is
the great Lord of all creatures. He is eternal, he is the great Creator,
and he is the highest state of blessedness. Learned persons versed in the
scriptures attain to great happiness by knowing him. In that spot are the
celestial Rishis, the Siddhas, and, indeed, all the Rishis,--where
dwelleth the slayer of Madhu, that primeval Deity and mighty Yogin! Let
no doubt enter thy heart that that spot is the foremost of all holy
spots. These, O lord of earth, are the tirthas and sacred spots on earth,
that I have recited, O best of men! These all are visited by the Vasus,
the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the Marutas, the Aswins and the illustrious
Rishis resembling the celestials themselves. By journeying, O son of
Kunti, to those places, with the Brahmanas and ascetics that are with
thee and with thy blessed brothers, thou wilt be freed from anxiety!"
