SECTION XCIX
"Lomasa said, 'When Ilwala learnt that those kings along with the great
Rishi had arrived on the confines of his domain, he went out with his
ministers and worshipped them duly. And that prince of Asuras received
them hospitably, entertaining them, O son of the Kuru race, with well
dressed meat supplied by his brother Vatapi (transformed into a ram).
Then all those royal sages, beholding the mighty Asura Vatapi, who had
been transformed into a ram thus cooked for them, became sad and
cheerless and were nearly deprived of themselves. But that best of
Rishis--Agastya--addressing those royal sages, said, 'Yield ye not to
grief, I will eat up the great Asura.' And the mighty Rishi then sat
himself down on an excellent seat, and the prince of Asuras, Ilwala,
began to distribute the food smilingly. And Agastya ate up the whole of
the meat supplied by Vatapi (transformed into a ram). And after the
dinner was over, Ilwala began to summon his brother. But thereupon a
quantity of air alone came out of the illustrious Rishi's stomach, with a
sound that was as loud, O child, as the roar of the clouds. And Ilwala
repeatedly said, 'Come out, O Vatapi!' Then that best of
Munis--Agastya--bursting out in laughter, said, 'How can he come out? I
have already digested that great Asura.' And beholding his brother
already digested, Ilwala became sad and cheerless and joining his hands,
along with his ministers, addressing the Rishi (and his companions),
said, 'What for have ye come hither, and what can I do for you?' And
Agastya smilingly answered Ilwala, saying, 'We know thee, O Asura, to be
possessed of great power and also enormous wealth. These kings are not
very wealthy while my need also of wealth is great. Give us what thou
canst, without injuring others.' Thus addressed Ilwala saluted the Rishi
and said, 'If thou say what it is that I mean to give, then will I give
you wealth.' Hearing this Agastya said, 'O great Asura, thou hast even
purposed to give unto each of these kings ten thousand kine and as many
gold coins. And unto me thou hast purposed to give twice as much, as also
a car of gold and a couple of horses fleet as thought. If thou enquirest
now, thou wilt soon learn that your car is made of gold.' Thereupon, O
son of Kunti, Ilwala made enquiries and learnt that the car he had
intended to give away was really a golden one. And the Daitya then with a
sad heart, gave away much wealth and that car, unto which were yoked two
steeds called Virava and Surava. And those steeds, O Bharata, took those
kings and Agastya and all that wealth to the asylum of Agastya within the
twinkling of an eye. And those royal sages then obtaining Agastya's
permission, went away to their respective cities. And Agastya also (with
that wealth) did all that his wife Lopamudra had desired. And Lopamudra
then said, 'O illustrious one, thou hast now accomplished all my wishes.
Beget thou a child on me that shall be possessed of great energy.' And
Agastya replied unto her, saying, 'O blessed and beauteous one, I have
been much gratified with thy conduct. Listen thou unto me as regards the
proposal I make in respect of thy offspring. Wouldst thou have a thousand
sons, or a century of sons each equal to ten, or ten sons equal each to
an hundred, or only one son who may vanquish a thousand?' Lopamudra
answered, 'Let me have one son equal unto a thousand, O thou endued with
wealth of asceticism! One good and learned son is preferable to many evil
ones.'"
"Lomasa continued, 'Saying, 'So be it,' that pious Muni thereupon knew
his devout wife of equal behaviour. And after she had conceived, he
retired into the forest. And after the Muni had gone away, the foetus
began to grow for seven years. And after the seventh year had expired,
there came out of the womb, the highly learned Dridhasyu, blazing, O
Bharata, in his own splendour. And the great Brahmana and illustrious
ascetic, endued with mighty energy, took his birth as the Rishi's son,
coming out of the womb, as if repeating the Vedas with the Upanishads and
the Angas. Endued with great energy while yet a child, he used to carry
loads of sacrificial fuel into the asylum of his father, and was thence
called Idhmavaha (carrier of sacrificial wood). And the Muni, beholding
his son possessed of such virtues, became highly glad.
"And it was thus, O Bharata, that Agastya begat an excellent son in
consequence of which his ancestors, O king, obtained the regions they
desired. And it is from that time that this spot hath become known on the
earth as the asylum of Agastya. Indeed, O king, this is the asylum graced
with numerous beauties, of that Agastya who had slain Vatapi of
Prahrada's race. The sacred Bhagirathi, adored by gods and Gandharvas
gently runneth by, like a breeze-shaken pennon in the welkin. Yonder also
she floweth over craggy crests descending lower and lower, and looketh
like an affrighted she-snake lying along the hilly slopes. Issuing out of
the matted locks of Mahadeva, she passeth along, flooding the southern
country and benefiting it like a mother, and ultimately mingleth with the
ocean as if she were his favourite bride. Bathe ye as ye like in this
sacred river, ye son of Pandu! And behold there, O Yudhisthira, the
tirtha of Bhrigu that is celebrated over the three worlds and adored, O
king, by great Rishis. Bathing here, Rama (of Bhrigu's race) regained his
might, which had been taken away from him (by Dasaratha's son). Bathing
here, O son of Pandu, with thy brothers and Krishna, thou wilt certainly
regain that energy of thine that hath been taken away by Duryodhana, even
as Rama regained his that had been taken away by Dasaratha's son in
hostile encounter."
Vaisampayana continued, "At these words of Lomasa, Yudhishthira bathed
there with his brothers and Krishna, and offered oblations of water, O
Bharata, to the gods and the Pitris. And, O bull among men, after
Yudhishthira had bathed in that tirtha, his body blazed forth in brighter
effulgence, and he became invisible in respect of all foes. The son of
Pandu then, O king, asked Lomasa, saying, 'O illustrious one, why had
Rama's energy and might been taken away? And how also did he regain it? O
exalted one, I ask thee, tell me everything.'"
"Lomasa said, 'Listen, O king, to the history of Rama (the son of
Dasaratha) and Rama of Bhrigu's line gifted with intelligence. For the
destruction of Ravana, O king, Vishnu, in his own body, took his birth as
the son of illustrious Dasaratha. We saw in Ayodhya that son of Dasaratha
after he had been born. It was then that Rama of Bhrigu's line, the son
of Richika by Renuka, hearing of Rama the son of Dasaratha--of spotless
deeds--went to Ayodhya, impelled by curiosity, and taking with him that
celestial bow so fatal to the Kshatriyas, for ascertaining the prowess of
Dasaratha's son. And Dasaratha, hearing that Rama of Bhrigu's race had
arrived on the confines of his domains, set his own son Rama to receive
the hero with respect. And beholding Dasaratha's son approach and stand
before him with ready weapons, Rama of Bhrigu's line smilingly addressed
him, O son of Kunti, saying, 'O king, O exalted one, string, if thou
canst, with all thy mighty, this bow which in my hands was made the
instrument of destroying the Kshatriya race.' Thus addressed, Dasaratha's
son answered, 'O illustrious one, it behoveth thee not to insult me thus.
Nor am I, amongst the regenerate classes, deficient in the virtues of the
Kshatriya order. The descendants of Ikshwaku in special never boast of
the prowess of their arms.' Then unto Dasaratha's son who said so, Rama
of Bhrigu's line replied, 'A truce to all crafty speech, O king! Take
this bow.' At this, Rama the son of Dasaratha, took in anger from the
hands of Rama of Bhrigu's line that celestial bow that had dealt death to
the foremost of Kshatriyas. And, O Bharata, the mighty hero smilingly
strung that bow without the least exertion, and with its twang loud as
the thunder-rattle, affrighted all creatures. And Rama, the son of
Dasaratha, then, addressing Rama of Bhrigu's said, 'Here, I have strung
this bow. What else, O Brahmana, shall I do for thee?' Then Rama, the son
of Jamadagni, gave unto the illustrious son of Dasaratha a celestial
arrow and said, 'Placing this on the bow-string, draw to thy ear, O
hero!' "Lomasa continued, 'Hearing this, Dasaratha's son blazed up in
wrath and said, 'I have heard what thou hast said, and even pardoned
thee. O son of Bhrigu's race, thou art full of vanity. Through the
Grandsire's grace thou hast obtained energy that is superior to that of
the Kshatriyas. And it is for this that thou insultest me. Behold me now
in my native form: I give thee sight.' Then Rama of Bhrigu's race beheld
in the body of Dasaratha's son the Adityas with the Vasus, the Rudras,
the Sadhyas with the Marutas, the Pitris, Hutasana, the stellar
constellations and the planets, the Gandharvas, the Rakshasas, the
Yakshas, the Rivers, the tirthas, those eternal Rishis identified with
Brahma and called the Valkhilyas, the celestial Rishis, the Seas and
Mountains, the Vedas with the Upanishads and Vashats and the sacrifices,
the Samans in their living form, the Science of weapons, O Bharata, and
the Clouds with rain and lightning, O Yudhishthira! And the illustrious
Vishnu then shot that shaft. And at this the earth was filled with sounds
of thunder, and burning meteors. O Bharata, began to flash through the
welkin. And showers of dust and rain fell upon the surface of the earth.
And whirlwinds and frightful sounds convulsed everything, and the earth
herself began to quake. And shot by the hand of Rama, that shalt,
confounding by its energy the other Rama, came back blazing into Rama's
hands. And Bhargava, who had thus been deprived of his senses, regaining
consciousness and life, bowed unto Rama--that manifestation of Vishnu's
power. And commanded by Vishnu, he proceeded to the mountains of
Mahendra. And thenceforth that great ascetic began to dwell there, in
terror and shame. And after the expiration of a year, the Pitris,
beholding Rama dwelling there deprived of energy, his pride quelled, and
himself sunk in affliction, said unto him, 'O son, having approached
Vishnu, thy behaviour towards him was not proper. He deserveth for aye
worship and respect in the three worlds. Go, O son, to that sacred river
which goeth by name of Vadhusara! Bathing in all the tirthas of that
stream, thou wilt regain thy energy! There in that river is the tirthas
called Diptoda where thy grandsire Bhrigu, O Rama, in the celestial age
had practised ascetic penances of great merit.' Thus addressed by them,
Rama, O son of Kunti, did what the Pitris bade him, and obtained back at
this tirtha, O son of Pandu, the energy he had lost. Even this O child,
was what befell Rama of spotless deeds in days in of yore, after he had,
O king, met Vishnu (in the form of Dasaratha's son)!'"
