SECTION C
"Yudhishthira said, 'O best of regenerate ones, I desire again to hear of
the achievements in detail of Agastya--that illustrious Rishi endued with
great intelligence.'"
"Lomasa said, 'Listen now, O king, to the excellent and wonderful and
extraordinary history of Agastya, as also, O monarch, about the prowess
of that Rishi of immeasurable energy. There were in the Krita age certain
tribes of fierce Danavas that were invincible in battle. And they were
known by the name of Kalakeyas and were endued with terrible prowess.
Placing themselves under Vritra and arming themselves with diverse
weapons they pursued the celestials with Indra at their head in all
directions. The gods then all resolved upon the destruction of Vritra,
and went with Indra at their head to Brahma. And beholding them standing
before him with joined hands, Parameshthi addressed them all and said,
"Everything is known to me, ye gods, about what ye seek. I shall indicate
now the means by which ye may slay Vritra. There is a high-souled and
great Rishi known by the name of Dadhicha. Go ye all together unto him
and solicit of him a boon. With well-pleased heart, that Rishi of
virtuous soul will even grant you the boon. Desirous as ye are of
victory, go ye all together unto him and tell him, 'For the good of the
three worlds, give us thy bones.' Renouncing his body, he will give you
his bones. With these bones of his, make ye a fierce and powerful weapon
to be called Vajra, endued with six sides and terrible roar and capable
of destroying even the most powerful enemies. With that weapon will he of
a hundred sacrifices slay Vritia. I have now told you all. See that all
this is done speedily.' Thus addressed by him, the gods with the
Grandsire's leave (came away), and with Narayana at their head proceeded
to the asylum of Dadhicha. That asylum was on the other bank of the river
Saraswati and covered with diverse trees and creepers. And it resounded
with the hum of bees as if they were reciting Samans. And it also echoed
with the melodious notes of the male Kokila and the Chakora. And
buffaloes and boars and deer and Chamaras wandered there at pleasure
freed from the fear of tigers. And elephants with the juice trickling
down from rent temples, plunging in the stream, sported with the
she-elephants and made the entire region resound with their roars. And
the place also echoed with the loud roars of lions and tigers, while at
intervals might be seen those grisly monarchs of the forest lying
stretched in caves and glens and beautifying them with their presence And
such was the asylum, like unto heaven itself, of Dadhicha, that the gods
entered. And there they beheld Dadhicha looking like the sun himself in
splendour and blazing in grace of person like the Grandsire himself. And
the celestials saluted the feet of the Rishi and bowed unto him and
begged of him the boon that the Grandsire had bade them do. Then
Dadhicha, well pleased, addressing those foremost of celestials, said,
'Ye celestials, I will do what is for your benefit. I will even renounce
this body of mine myself.' And that foremost of men with soul under
control, having said this, suddenly renounced his life. The gods then
took the bones of the deceased Rishi as directed. And the celestials,
glad at heart, went to Twashtri (the celestial Artificer) and spake to
him of the means of victory. And Twashtri, hearing those words of theirs,
became filled with joy, and constructed (out of those bones) with great
attention and care the fierce weapons called Vajra. And having
manufactured it, he joyfully addressed Indra, saying, 'With this foremost
of weapons, O exalted one, reduce that fierce foe of the gods to ashes.
And having slain the foe, rule thou happily the entire domain of heaven,
O chief of the celestials, with those that follow thee.' And thus
addressed by Twashtri, Purandara took the Vajra from his hand, joyfully
and with proper respect."
