SECTION CIII
"The celestials said, 'Through thy favour it is that all born beings of
the four kinds increase. And they being created, propitiate the dwellers
of heaven by offerings made to the gods and the names of departed
forefathers. Thus it is that people, protected by thee and free from
trouble live depending on one another, and (so) increase. Now this peril
hath befallen the people. We do not know by whom are Brahmanas being
killed during the night. If the Brahmanas are destroyed, the earth itself
will meet with destruction, and if the earth cometh to an end, heaven
also will cease to exist. O mighty-armed one, O lord of the universe! we
beseech thee (to act so) that all the worlds, protected by thee, may not
come to an end, so it may please thee.'
"Vishnu said, 'Ye gods! To me is known the reason of the destruction of
the born beings, I shall speak of it to you; listen with minds free from
tribulation. There exists an exceedingly fierce host, known by the name
of Kalakeyas. They, under the lead of Vritra, were devastating the whole
universe. And when they saw that Vritra was slain by the sagacious Indra
endued with a thousand eyes, they, to preserve their lives, entered into
the ocean, that abode of Varuna. And having entered the ocean, abounding
with sharks and crocodiles, they at night killed the saints at this spot
with the view of exterminating the people. But they cannot be slain, as
they have taken shelter within the sea. Ye should, therefore, think of
some expedient to dry up the ocean. Who save Agastya is capable of drying
up the sea. And without drying up the ocean, these (demons) cannot be
assailed by any other means.' Hearing these words of Vishnu, the gods
took the permission of Brahma, who lives at the best of all regions, and
went to the hermitage of Agastya. Then they beheld the high-souled
Agastya, the son of Varuna, of resplendent mien, and waited upon by
saints, even as Brahma is waited upon by celestials. And approaching him,
they addressed the son of Mitra and Varuna at the hermitage, magnanimous
and unswerving, and looking like an embodiment of pious works piled
together, and glorified him by reciting his deeds. The deities said,
'Thou wert formerly the refuge of the gods when they were oppressed by
Nahusha. Thorn of the world that he was, he was thrown down from his
throne of heaven--from the celestial regions. Vindhya, the foremost of
all mountains, suddenly began to increase his height, from a wrathful
competition with the sun (i. e., to rival him in altitude). But he hath
ceased to increase, as he was unable to disobey thy command. And when
darkness hath covered the world, the born beings were harassed by death,
but having obtained thee for a protector, they attained the utmost
security. Whenever we are beset by perils, thy reverence is always our
refuge; for this reason it is that we solicit a boon from thee; as thou
ever grantest the boon solicited (of thee).'"
