SECTION CX
Vaisampayana said, "O chief of the Bharata race! then the son of Kunti
went at a slow pace to the two rivers Nanda and Aparananda, which had the
virtue of destroying the dread of sin. And the protector of men having
reached the healthy hill Hemakuta, beheld there very many strange and
inconceivable sights. There the very utterance of words caused the
gathering of clouds, and a thousand volleys of stones. And people at its
sight, were struck sad, and were unable to ascend the hill. There the
winds blew for aye, and the heavens always poured down rains; and
likewise the sounds of the recitation of the sacred writ were heard, yet
nobody was seen. In the evening and in the morning would be seen the
blessed fire that carries offerings to the gods and there flies would
bite and interrupt the practice of austerities. And there a sadness would
overtake the soul, and people would become sick. The son of Pandu, having
observed very many strange circumstances of this character again
addressed his questions to Lomasa with reference to these wonderful
things.
"Lomasa said, 'O slayer of foes! O king! I am going to tell thee as we
heard it before; do thou attend to the same with intent mind. In this
peak of Rishava, there was once a saint known by that name. And his life
had lasted for many hundred years. And he was devoted to penances and was
greatly wrathful. And he, forsooth, for having been spoken to by others,
from wrath addressed the hill thus, 'Whoever should utter any words here,
thou must throw stones at him, and thou must call up the winds to prevent
him from making any noise.' This was what the saint said. And so at this
place, as soon as a man utters any words, he is forbidden by a roaring
cloud. O king! thus these deeds were performed by that great saint, and
from wrath he also forbade other acts. O king! tradition says that when
the gods of yore had come to the Nanda, suddenly came over (there) a
number of men to look at the celestials. Those same gods at whose head
stood Indra did not, however, like to be seen; and so they rendered this
spot inaccessible, by raising obstructions in the form of hills. And from
that day forward, O Kunti's son! men could not cast their eyes at any
time on what looked like a hill, far less could they ascend the same.
This big mountain is incapable of being seen by one who hath not led an
austere life, nor can such a one ascend it. Therefore, O son of Kunti!
keep thou thy tongue under control. Here at that time all those gods
performed the best sacrificial rites. O Bharata's son! Even up to this
day these marks thereof may be seen. This grass here hath the form of the
sacred kusa grass: the ground here seemeth to be overspread with the
sacred grass; and. O lord of men! many of these trees here look like the
spots for tying the sacrificial beasts. O Bharata's son! still the Gods
and saints have residence here; and their sacred fire is observed in the
morning and in the evening. Here if one bathes, his sin is forthwith
destroyed, O Kunti's son! O most praiseworthy of the race of Kuru! do
thou, therefore, perform thy ablutions, together with thy younger
brothers. Then after having washed thyself in the Nanda, thou wilt repair
to the river Kausiki, the spot where the most excellent and severest form
of penances was practised by Viswamitra. Then the king with his
attendants, having washed his body there, proceeded to the river Kausiki,
which was pure and delightful and pleasant with cool water.'
"Lomasa said, 'This is the pure divine river by name Kausiki. O chief of
Bharata's race! and this is the delightful hermitage of Viswamitra,
conspicuous here. And this is a hermitage, with a holy name, belonging to
Kasyapa of mighty soul; whose son was Rishyasringa, devoted to penances,
and of passions under control. He by force of his penances caused Indra
to rain; and that god, the slayer of the demons Vala and Vritra, dreading
him, poured down rain during a drought. That powerful and mighty son of
Kasyapa was born of a hind. He worked a great marvel in the territory of
Lomapada. And when the crops had been restored, king Lomapada gave his
daughter Santa in marriage to him, as the sun gave in marriage his
daughter Savitri.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'How was the son of Kasyapa, Rishyasringa, born of a
hind? And how was he endowed with holiness, being the issue of a
reprehensible sexual connexion? And for what reason was Indra, the slayer
of the demons Vala and Vritra, afraid of that same sagacious boy, and
poured down rain during a period of drought? And how beautiful was that
princess Santa, pure in life, she who allured the heart of him when he
had turned himself into a stag? And since the royal saint Lomapada is
said to have been of a virtuous disposition, why was it that in his
territory, Indra, the chastiser of the demon Paka, had withheld rain? O
holy saint! all this in detail, exactly as it happened, thou wilt be
pleased to narrate to me, for I am desirous of hearing the deeds of
Rishyasringa's life.'
"Lomasa said, 'Hear how Rishyasringa, of dreaded name, was born as a son
to Vibhandaka, who was a saint of the Brahmana caste, who had cultured
his soul by means of religious austerities, whose seed never failed in
causing generation, and who was learned and bright like the Lord of
beings. And the father was highly honoured, and the son was possessed of
a mighty spirit, and, though a boy, was respected by aged man. And that
son of Kasyapa, Vibhandaka, having proceeded to a big lake, devoted
himself to the practice of penances. And that same saint, comparable to a
god, laboured for a long period. And once while he was washing his mouth
in the waters, he beheld the celestial nymph Urvasi--whereupon came out
his seminal fluid. And, O king! a hind at that time lapped it up along
with the water that she was drinking, being athirst; and from this cause
she became with child. That same hind had really been a daughter of the
gods, and had been told of yore by the holy Brahma, the creator of the
worlds, 'Thou shall be a hind; and when in that form, thou shall give
birth to a saint; thou shalt then be freed.' As Destiny would have it,
and as the word of the creator would not be untrue, in that same hind was
born his (Vibhandaka's) son a mighty saint. And Rishyasringa, devoted to
penances, always passed his days in the forest. O king! there was a horn
on the head of that magnanimous saint and for this reason did he come to
be known at the time by the name of Rishyasringa. And barring his father,
not a man had ever before been seen by him; therefore his mind, O
protector of men! was entirely devoted to the duties of a continent life.
At this very period there was a ruler of the land of Anga known by the
name of Lomapada who was a friend of Dasaratha. We have heard that he
from love of pleasure had been guilty of a falsehood towards a Brahmana.
And that same ruler of the world had at that time been shunned by all
persons of the priestly class. And he was without a ministering priest
(to assist him in his religious rites). And the god of a thousand eyes
(Indra) suddenly abstained from giving rain in his territory; so that his
people began to suffer and O lord of the earth! he questioned a number of
Brahmanas, devoted to penances, of cultivated minds, and possessed of
capabilities with reference to the matter of rain being granted by the
lord of gods, saying, 'How may the heavens grant us the rain? Think of an
expedient (for this purpose).' And those same cultured men, being thus
questioned, gave expression to their respective views. And one among
them--the best of saints--spake to that same king, saying, 'O lord of
kings! the Brahmanas are angry with thee. Do some act (therefore) for
appeasing them. O ruler of the earth! send for Rishyasringa, the son of a
saint, resident of the forest knowing nothing of the female sex, and
always taking delight in simplicity. O king! if he, great in the practice
of penances, should show himself in thy territory, forthwith rain would
be granted by the heavens, herein I have no doubt at all.' And, O king!
having heard these words Lomapada made atonement for his sins. And he
went away; and when the Brahmanas had been appeased, he returned again,
and seeing the king returned, the people were again glad at heart. Then
the king of Anga convened a meeting of his ministers, proficient in
giving counsel. And he took great pains in order to settle some plan for
securing a visit from Rishyasringa. And, O unswerving (prince)! with
those ministers, who were versed in all branches of knowledge, and
exceedingly proficient in worldly matters, and had a thorough training in
practical affairs, he at last settled a plan (for gaining his object).
And then he sent for a number of courtesans, women of the town, clever in
everything. And when they came, that same ruler of the earth spake to
them, saying, 'Ye lovely women! Ye must find some means to allure, and
obtain the confidence of the son of the saint--Rishyasringa, whom ye must
bring over to my territory.' And those same women, on the one hand afraid
of the anger of the king and on the other, dreading a curse from the
saint, became sad and confounded, and declared the business to be beyond
their power. One, however, among them--a hoary woman, thus spake to the
king, 'O great king! him whose wealth solely consists in penances, I
shall try to bring over here. Thou wilt, however, have to procure for me
certain things, in connection with the plan. In that case, I may be able
to bring over the son of the saint--Rishyasringa.' Thereupon the king
gave an order that all that she might ask for should be procured. And he
also gave a good deal of wealth and jewels of various kinds. And then, O
Lord of the earth, she took with herself a number of women endowed with
beauty and youth, and went to the forest without delay."
