SECTION CVI
"Lomasa said, 'Then gathered together, Brahma, the grandfather of men
(thus) addressed, 'Go ye, O gods! whither your pleasure may lead you, or
your desire conduct you. It will take a long course of time for the ocean
to resume its wonted state; the occasion will be furnished by the agnates
of the great king Bhagiratha.' Hearing the words of the (universal)
grandfather (Brahma), all the foremost gods went their way biding the day
(when the ocean was to be filled again).'
"Yudhishthira said, 'What was that occasion, O Saint? And how did the
agnates of (Bhagiratha furnish the same)? And how was the ocean refilled
by the interference of Bhagiratha? O Saint, who deemest thy religious
practices as thy only treasure. O thou of the priestly class! I wish to
hear the account of the achievements of the king, narrated in detail by
thyself.'"
"Vaisampayana said, "Thus addressed by the magnanimous and virtuous king,
he, the chief of men of the priestly class, narrated the achievements of
the high-souled (king) Sagara."
"Lomasa said, 'There was born in the family of the Ikshaku tribe, a ruler
of the earth named Sagara, endued with beauty, and strength. And that
same (king) of a dreaded name was sonless, O descendant of Bharata! And
he carried havoc through the tribes of the Haihayas and the Talajanghas;
brought under subjection the whole of the military caste; (and so) ruled
over his own kingdom. And, O most praiseworthy of the descendants of
Bharata! O chief of the Bharata race! he had two wives proud of their
beauty and of their youth,--one a princess of the Vidarbha race, and the
other of the royal line of Sivi. And, O chief of kings, that same ruler
of men, betook himself to the mountain Kailasa, accompanied by both his
wives, and with the desire of having a son became engaged in the practice
of exceeding austere penances. And being engaged in the practice of rigid
austerities, and (also) employed in the contemplation known by the name
of Yoga, he obtained the sight of the magnanimous god with three
eyes--the slayer of the demon called Tripura; the worker of blessings
(for all beings); the (eternally) existent one; the ruling Being, the
holder of the Pinaka bow; carrying in his hand his (well-known
weapon)--the trident; the god of three eyes; the repository of (eternal)
peace; the ruler of all those that are fierce; capable of assuming very
many forms; and the lord of the goddess Uma. And that same ruler of men,
of mighty arms, as soon as he beheld the god--that giver of boons--fell
down at his feet, with both his queens, and proffered a prayer to have a
son. And the god Siva, well pleased with him, spake (thus) to that most
righteous of the rulers of men, attended by his two wives, saying, 'O
lord of men! considering the (astrological) moment at which thou hast
proffered thy prayer to me, sixty thousand sons, O foremost of choice men
valorous and characterised by exceeding pride, will be born in one off
thy two wives (here). But they all, O ruler of the earth, shall perish
together. In the other wife, (however), will be born a single valiant
son, who will perpetuate thy race.' Having said this to him, the god
Rudra (Siva) vanished from sight at that very spot, and that same king
Sagara now came (back) to his own abode accompanied by his two wives,
exceedingly delighted at heart (for what had happened) then. And, O most
praiseworthy of the sons of Manu! (i.e., men), there the two lotus-eyed
wives of him--the princess of Vidarbha and the princess of Sivi--came
(erelong) to be with child. And afterwards, on the due day, the princess
of Vidarbha brought forth (something) of the shape of a gourd and the
princess of Sivi gave birth to a boy as beautiful as a god. Then the
ruler of the earth made up his mind to throw away the gourd,--when he
heard (proceeding) from the sky a speech (uttered) in a grave and solemn
voice, 'O king! do thou not be guilty of this hasty act; thou shouldst
not abandon thy sons. Take out the seeds from the gourd and let them be
preserved with care in steaming vessels partly filled with clarified
butter. Then thou wilt get, O scion of Bharata's race! sixty thousand
sons. O ruler of men! the great god (Siva) hath spoken that thy sons are
to be born in this manner. Let not therefore thy mind be turned away
therefrom.'"
