SECTION CV
"Lomasa said, 'That blessed saint, the son of Varuna, having reached the
sea spake unto the assembled gods, and the saints gathered together,
saying 'I surely am going to drink up the ocean--that abode of the god of
waters. Be ye quickly ready with those preparations which it devolves
upon you to make.' Having spoken these few words, the unswerving
offspring of Mitra and Varuna, full of wrath, began to drink up the sea,
while all the worlds stood observing (the deed). Then the gods, together
with Indra, seeing how the sea was being drunk up, were struck with
mighty amazement, and glorified him with laudatory words, saying, 'Thou
art our protector, and the Providence itself for men,--and also the
creator of the worlds. By thy favour the universe with its gods may
possibly be saved from havoc.' And the magnanimous one, glorified by the
gods--while the musical instruments of celestial choristers were playing
all round, and while celestial blossoms were showered upon him--rendered
waterless the wide ocean. And seeing the wide ocean rendered devoid of
water, the host of gods was exceedingly glad; and taking up choice
weapons of celestial forge, fell to slaying the demons with courageous
hearts,--And they, assailed by the magnanimous gods, of great strength,
and swift of speed, and roaring loudly, were unable to withstand the
onset of their fleet and valorous (foes)--those residents of the heavenly
regions, O descendant of Bharata! And those demons, attacked by the gods,
bellowing loudly, for a moment carried on terrible conflict. They had
been in the first instance burnt by the force of penances performed by
the saints, who had matured their selves; therefore, the demons, though
they tried to the utmost, were at last slaughtered by the gods. And
decked with brooches of gold, and bearing on their persons ear-rings and
armlets, the demons, when slain, looked beautiful indeed, like palasa
trees when full of blossoms. Then, O best of men! a few--the remnant of
those that were killed of the Kalakeya race, having rent asunder the
goddess Earth, took refuge at the bottom of the nether regions. And the
gods, when they saw that the demons were slain, with diverse speeches,
glorified the mighty saint, and spake the following words. 'O thou of
mighty arms, by thy favour men have attained a mighty blessing, and the
Kalakeyas, of ruthless strength have been killed by thy power, O creator
of beings! Fill the sea (now), O mighty-armed one; give up again the
water drunk up by thee.' Thus addressed, the blessed and mighty saint
replied, 'That water in sooth hath been digested by me. Some other
expedient, therefore, must be thought of by you, if ye desire to make
endeavour to fill the ocean.' Hearing this speech of that saint of
matured soul, the assembled gods were struck with both wonder and
sadness, O great king! And thereupon, having bidden adieu to each other,
and bowed to the mighty saint all the born beings went their way. And the
gods with Vishnu, came to Brahma. And having held consultation again,
with the view of filling up the sea, they, with joined hands, spake about
replenishing it."
