SECTION CXV
"Vaisampayana said, 'The protector of the earth spent there a single
night, and with his brothers, paid the highest honours to the religious
men. And Lomasa made him acquainted with the names of all of them, such
as the Bhrigus, the Angiras, the Vasishthas, and the Kasyapas. And the
royal saint paid visit to them all and made obeisance to them with joined
palms. And then he asked the valiant Akritavrana, who was a follower of
Parasurama, when will the revered Parasurama show himself to the
religious men here? It is desired on that occasion to obtain a sight of
the descendant of Bhrigu.'
"Akritavrana said, 'Thy journey to this spot is already known to Rama,
whose soul spontaneously knows everything. And he is in every way
well-pleased with thee, and he will show himself readily to thee. And the
saints who practise penances here, are permitted to see him on the
fourteenth and the eighth day of the lunar course. On the morrow at the
end of this very night there will set in the fourteenth day of the lunar
course. On that occasion thou wilt have a sight of him, clad in a sable
deerskin, and wearing his hair in the form of a matted mass."
"Yudhishthira said, Thou hast been a follower of the mighty Rama,
Jamadagni's son; thou must, therefore, have been the eye-witness of all
the deeds achieved by him in former days. I, therefore, request thee to
narrate to me how the members of the military caste were vanquished by
Rama on the field of battle, and what the original cause of those
conflicts was.'
"Akritavrana said, 'With pleasure shall I recite to thee that excellent
story, O Bharata's son, O chief of kings, the story of the godlike deeds
of Rama, the son of Jamadagni, who traced his origin to Bhrigu's race. I
shall also relate the achievements of the great ruler of the Haihaya
tribe. That king, Arjuna by name, the mighty lord of the Haihaya tribe
was killed by Rama. He, O Pandu's son, was endued with a thousand arms;
and by the favour of Dattatreya he likewise had a celestial car made of
gold. And, O protector of the earth, his rule extended over the entire
animated world, wheresoever located on this earth. And the car of that
mighty monarch could proceed everywhere in an unobstructed course. And
grown resistless by the virtue of a granted boon, he ever mounted on that
car, trampled upon gods and Yakshas and saints on all sides round. And
all the born beings wheresoever placed, were harassed by him. Then the
celestials and the saints of a rigidly virtuous life, met together, and
thus spake to Vishnu, the god of gods, the slayer of demons, and
possessed of prowess that never failed, saying. 'O blessed and revered
lord, for the purpose of preserving all the born beings, it is necessary
that Arjuna should be killed by thee.' And the mighty ruler of the
Haihaya tribe placing himself on his celestial car, affronted Indra,
while that deity was enjoying himself with Sachi, his queen. Then, O
Bharata's son, the blessed and the revered god (Vishhnu) held a
consultation with Indra, with a view to destroying Kartavirya's son. And
on that occasion, all that was for the good of the world of beings, was
communicated by the lord of gods; and the blessed god worshipped by the
world, to do all that was necessary, went to the delightful Vadari wood
which was his own chosen retreat for practising penances. And at this
very time there lived on the earth a mighty monarch in the land of
Kanyakuvja, a sovereign whose military force was exceedingly great. And
his name of Gadhi was famous in the world. He, however, betook himself to
a forest-life. And while he was dwelling in the midst of the wood, there
was born to him a daughter beautiful as a nymph of heaven. And Richika,
the son of Bhrigu, asked for her to be united with himself in marriage.
And then Gadhi spake to that Brahmana, who led a rigidly austere life,
saying. There is a certain family custom in our race; it hath been
founded by my ancestors of a bygone age. And, O most excellent of the
sacerdotal caste, be it known to thee that the intending bridegroom must
offer a dowry consisting of a thousand fleet steeds, whose colour must be
brown and every one of whom must possess a single sable car. But, O
Bhrigu's son, a reverend saint like thee cannot be asked to offer the
same. Nor can my daughter be refused to a magnanimous saint of thy
(exalted) rank.' Thereupon Richika said, 'I will give thee a thousand
fleet steeds, brown in hue and possessing a single sable car; let thy
daughter be given in marriage to me.'
"Akritavrana said. Thus having given his word, O king, he went and said
to Varuna, 'Give me a thousand fleet steeds brown in colour, and each
with one black ear. I want the same as dowry for my marriage.' To him
Varuna forthwith gave a thousand steeds. Those steeds had issued out of
the river Ganga; hence the spot hath been named: The horse's landing
place. And in the city of Kanyakuvja, the daughter of Gadhi, Satyavati by
name, was given in marriage; and the gods themselves were of the party of
the bride. Richika, the most excellent of the sacerdotal caste, thus
procured a thousand steeds, and had a sight of the dwellers of heaven and
won a wife in the proper form. And he enjoyed himself with the girl of
slender waist, and thus gratified all the wishes and desire that he ever
had. And when the marriage had been celebrated, O king, his father Bhrigu
came on a visit to see him and his wife; and he was glad to see his
praiseworthy son. And the husband and wife together paid their best
respects to him, who was worshipped by all the gods. And when he had
seated himself, they both with joined palms, stood near him, in order
that they might to his bidding. And then the revered saint, Bhrigu, glad
at heart, thus spoke to his daughter-in-law, saying, 'O lovely daughter,
as for a boon I am ready to grant thee any object of thy wish.' And there
upon she asked for his favour in this, that a son might be born to both
herself and her mother. And he vouchsafed the favour thus asked for.'
"Bhrigu said, 'During the days that your season lasts, thou and thy
mother must take a bath, with the ceremony for bringing forth a male
child. And ye two must then separately embrace two different trees--she a
peepal tree, and thou a fig tree. And, O dutiful girl, here are two pots
of rice and milk, prepared by me with the utmost care. I having ransacked
the whole universe to find the drugs, the essence whereof hath been
blended with this milk and rice. It must be taken as food with the
greatest care.' And saying this, he vanished from sight. The two ladies,
however, made an interchange both in the matter of the pots of rice, and
likewise as regards the trees (to be embraced by each). Then after the
lapse of very many days, the revered saint, once more came. And he came
knowing (what had happened) by his attribute of divine knowledge. Then
Bhrigu possessed of mighty strength, spake to Satyavati, his
daughter-in-law, saying, 'O dutiful girl! O my daughter of a lovely brow,
the wrong pot of rice thou tookest as food. And it was the wrong tree
which was embraced by thee. It was thy mother who deluded thee. A son
will be born of thee, who, though of the priestly caste, will be of a
character fit for the military order; while a mighty son will be born of
thy mother, who, though by birth a Kshatriya will assume a life suitable
to the sacerdotal order. And his power will be great, and he will walk on
the path trodden by righteous men.' Then she entreated her father-in-law
again and again, saying, 'Let not my son be of this character; but let my
grandson be such.' And, O Pandu's son, he replied, 'So let it be!' And
thus he was pleased to grant her prayer. Then she brought forth on the
expected day a son by name Jamadagni. And this son of Bhrigu was endowed
with both splendour and grace. And he grew in years and in strength, and
excelled he other saints in the proficiency of his Vaidik lore. O
chieftain of Bharata's race, to him, rivalling in lustre the author of
light (the sun), came spontaneously and without instruction the knowledge
of the entire military art and of the fourfold missile arms.'"
