SECTION CXXII
"Lomasa said, 'A son was born to the great saint Bhrigu, Chyavana by
name. And he, of an exceedingly resplendent form, began to practise
austerities by the side of yonder lake. And, O Pandu's son! O protector
of men! he of mighty energy assumed the posture called Vira, quiet and
still like an inanimate post, and for a long period, remained at the same
spot of ground. And he was turned into an anthill covered over with
creepers. And after the lapse of a long period, swarms of ants enveloped
him. And covered all over with ants, the sagacious saint looked exactly
like a heap of earth. And he went on practising austerities, enveloped on
all sides with that ant-hill. Now after the lapse of a long space of
time, that ruler of earth, Saryati by name, for amusement visited this
pleasant and excellent lake. With him were four thousand females,
espoused by him, O son of Bharata's race! there was also his only
daughter endued with beautiful brows, named Sukanya. She surrounded by
her maids, and decked out with jewels fit for the celestials, while
walking about, approached the anthill where Bhrigu's son was seated. And
surrounded by her maids, she began to amuse herself there, viewing the
beautiful scenery, and looking at the lofty trees of the wood. And she
was handsome and in the prime of her youth; and she was amorous and bent
on frolicking. And she began to break the twigs of the forest trees
bearing blossoms. And Bhrigu's son endued with intelligence beheld her
wandering like lightning, without her maids, and wearing a single piece
of cloth and decked with ornaments. And seeing her in the lone forest,
that ascetic of exceeding effulgence was inspired with desire. And that
regenerate Rishi possessing ascetic energy, who had a low voice, called
the auspicious one,--but she heard him not. Then seeing the eyes of
Bhrigu's son from the ant-hill, Sukanya from curiosity and losing her
sense, said, 'What is this?'--and with thorns pierced the eyes (of the
Rishi). And as his eyes being pierced by her, he felt exceeding pain and
became wroth. And (from anger) he obstructed the calls of nature of
Saryati's forces. And on their calls of nature being obstructed, the men
were greatly afflicted. And seeing this state of things, the king asked.
'Who is it that hath done wrong to the illustrious son of Bhrigu, old and
ever engaged in austerities and of wrathful temper? Tell me quick if ye
know it'. The soldiers (thereupon) answered him saying, 'We do not know
whether any one hath done wrong to the Rishi. Do thou, as thou list, make
a searching enquiry into the matter. Thereupon that ruler of earth, using
(as he saw occasion) both menace and conciliation, asked his friends
(about the circumstance). But they too did not know anything. Seeing that
the army was distressed owing to the obstruction of the calls of nature,
and also finding her father aggrieved, Sukanya said, 'Roving in the
forest, I lighted in the ant-hill here upon some brilliant substance.
Thereupon taking it for a glow-worm I neared it, and pierced it (with
thorns); Hearing this Saryati immediately came to the ant-hill, and there
saw Bhrigu's son, old both in years and austerities. Then the lord of
earth with joined hands, besought (the ascetic) saying, 'It behoveth thee
to forgive what my daughter through ignorance and greenness, hath done
unto thee." Chyavana the son of Bhrigu, addressed the monarch saying,
'Disregarding me, this one, filled with pride hath pierced my eyes. Even
her, O king, endued with beauty and who was bereft of her senses by
ignorance and temptation--even thy daughter would I have for my bride, I
tell thee truly, on this condition alone will I forgive thee.'
Lomasa said, "Hearing the words of the sage, Saryati, without pausing,
bestowed his daughter on the high-souled Chyavana. Having received the
hand of that girl, the holy one was pleased with the king. And having won
the Rishi's grace, the king went to his city, accompanied by his troops.
And the faultless Sukanya also having obtained that ascetic for her
husband, began to tend him, practising penances, and observing the
ordinance. And that one of a graceful countenance, and void of guile
worshipped Chyavana, and also ministered unto guests, and the sacred
fire."
