SECTION CXVI
"Akritavrana said, 'Jamadagni devoted himself to the study of the Veda
and the practice of sacred penances, and became famous for his great
austerities. Then he pursued a methodical course of study and obtained a
mastery over the entire Veda. And, O king, he paid a visit to Prasenajit
and solicited the hand of Renuka in marriage. And this prayer was granted
by the king. And the delight of Bhrigu's race having thus obtained Renuka
for his wife, took his residence with her in a hermitage, and began to
practice penances, being assisted by her. And four boys were born of her,
with Rama for the fifth. And although the youngest, Rama was superior to
all in merit. Now once upon a time, when her sons had gone out for the
purpose of gathering fruits, Renuka who had a pure and austere life, went
out to bathe. And, O king, while returning home, she happened to cast her
glance towards the king of Martikavata, known by the name of Chitraratha.
The king was in the water with his wives, and wearing on his breast a
lotus wreath, was engaged in sport. And beholding his magnificent form,
Renuka was inspired with desire. And this unlawful desire she could not
control, but became polluted within the water, and came back to the
hermitage frightened at heart. Her husband readily perceived what state
she was in. And mighty and powerful and of a wrathful turn of mind, when
he beheld that she had been giddy and that the lustre of chastity had
abandoned her, he reproached her by crying out 'Fie!' At that very moment
came in the eldest of Jamadagni's sons, Rumanvan; and then, Sushena, and
then, Vasu, and likewise, Viswavasu. And the mighty saint directed them
all one by one to put an end to the life of their mother. They, however,
were quite confounded and lost heart. And they could not utter a single
word. Then he in ire cursed them. And on being cursed they lost their
sense and suddenly became like inanimate objects, and comparable in
conduct to beasts and birds. And then Rama, the slayer of hostile heroes,
came to the hermitage, last of all. Him the mighty-armed Jamadagni, of
great austerities, addressed, saying, 'Kill this wicked mother of thine,
without compunction, O my son.' Thereupon Rama immediately took up an axe
and therewith severed his mother's head. Then, O great king, the wrath of
Jamadagni of mighty soul, was at once appeased; and well-pleased, he
spake the following words, 'Thou hast, my boy, performed at my bidding
this difficult task, being versed in virtue. Therefore, whatsoever wishes
there may be in thy heart, I am ready to grant them all. Do thou ask me.'
Thereupon Rama solicited that his mother might be restored to life, and
that he might not be haunted by the remembrance of this cruel deed and
that he might not be affected by any sin, and that his brothers might
recover their former state, and that he might be unrivalled on the field
of battle, and that he might obtain long life. And, O Bharata's son,
Jamadagni, whose penances were the most rigid, granted all those desires
of his son. Once, however, O lord, when his sons had gone out as before,
the valourous son of Kartavirya, the lord of the country near the shore
of the sea, came up to the hermitage. And when he arrived at that
hermitage, the wife of the saint received him hospitably. He, however,
intoxicated with a warrior's pride, was not at all pleased with the
reception accorded to him, and by force and in defiance of all
resistance, seized and carried off from that hermitage the chief of the
cows whose milk supplied the sacred butter, not heeding the loud lowing
of the cow. And he wantonly pulled down the large trees of the wood. When
Rama came home, his father himself told him all that had happened. Then
when Rama saw how the cow was lowing for its calf, resentment arose in
his heart. And he rushed towards Kartavirya's son, whose last moments had
drawn nigh. Then the descendant of Bhrigu, the exterminator of hostile
heroes, put forth his valour on the field of battle, and with sharpened
arrows with flattened tips, which were shot from a beautiful bow, cut
down Arjuna's arms, which numbered a thousand, and were massive like
(wooden) bolts for barring the door. He, already touched by the hand of
death, was overpowered by Rama, his foe. Then the kinsmen of Arjuna,
their wrath excited against Rama, rushed at Jamadagni in his hermitage,
while Rama was away. And they slew him there; for although his strength
was great, yet being at the time engaged in penances, he would not fight.
And while thus attacked by his foes, he repeatedly shouted the name of
Rama in a helpless and piteous way. And, O Yudhishthira, the sons of
Kartavirya shot Jamadagni, with their arrows, and having thus chastised
their foe, went their way. And when they had gone away, and when
Jamadagni had breathed his last, Rama, the delight of Bhrigu's race,
returned to the hermitage, bearing in his arms, fuel for religious rites.
And the hero beheld his father who had been put to death. And grieved
exceedingly he began to bewail the unworthy fate that had laid his father
low."
