SECTION CXXXVI
"Lomasa said, 'One day in the month of Chaitra, while fearlessly
wandering at large, Yavakri approached the hermitage of Raivya. And O son
of Bharata, in that beautiful hermitage, adorned with trees bearing
blossoms, he happened to behold the daughter-in-law of Raivya, sauntering
about like a Kinnara woman. And having lost his senses through passion,
Yavakri shamelessly spake unto the bashful maiden, saying, 'Be thou
attached unto me.' Thereupon, knowing his nature, and afraid of a curse,
as well as thinking of Raivya's power, she went unto him saying, 'I
agree.' Then, O son of Bharata, taking him in private, she kept him
chained. O conqueror of foes, returning to his hermitage, Raivya found
his daughter-in-law, Paravasu's wife, in tears. O Yudhishthira, thereat
consoling her with soft words, he enquired of her as to the cause of her
grief. Thereupon, the beautiful damsel told him all that Yavakri had said
unto her, and what she also had cleverly said unto him. Hearing of this
gross misbehaviour of Yavakri, the mind of the sage flamed up, and he
waxed exceedingly wroth. And being thus seized with passion, the great
sage of a highly irascible temper, tore off a matted lock of his hair,
and with holy mantras, offered it as a sacrifice on the sacred fire. At
this, there sprang out of it a female exactly resembling his
daughter-in-law. And then he plucked another matted lock of his hair, and
again offered it as a sacrifice into the fire. Thereupon sprang out of it
a demon, terrible to behold, and having fierce eyes. Then those, two
spake unto Raivya, saying, 'What shall we do?' Thereat, the angry sage
said unto them, 'Go and kill Yavakri.' Then saying, 'We shall do (as thou
biddest)'--they two went away with the intention of slaying Yavakri. And
with her charms, the female whom the large-hearted sage had created,
robbed Yavakri of his sacred water-pot. Then with his uplifted spear the
demon flew at Yavakri, when he had been deprived of his water-pot and
rendered unclean. And seeing the demon approach with uplifted spear for
the purpose of slaying him, Yavakri rose up all on a sudden and fled
towards a tank. But finding it devoid of water, he hurried towards all
the rivers. But they too were all dried up. And being obstructed again
and again by the fierce demon, holding the spear, Yavakri in fright
attempted to enter into the Agnihotra room of his father. But there, O
king, he was repulsed by a blind Sudra warder, and he remained at the
door, grasped by the man. And, finding Yavakri thus grasped by the Sudra,
the demon hurled his spear at him, and thereupon he fell down dead,
pierced in the heart. After slaying Yavakri, the demon went back to
Raivya, and with the permission of that sage, began to live with the
female."
