SECTION CXLI
"Lomasa said, O sons of Pandu, ye have seen many a mountain, and river
and town and forest and beautiful tirtha; and have touched with your
hands the sacred waters. Now this way leads to the celestial mountain
Mandara; therefore be ye attentive and composed. Ye will now repair to
the residence of the celestials and the divine sages of meritorious
deeds. Here, O king, flows the mighty and beautiful river (Alakananda) of
holy water adored by hosts of celestials and sages, and tracing its
source to (the site of) the jujube tree. It is frequented and worshipped
by high-souled Vaihayasas, Valakhilyas and Gandharvas of mighty souls.
Accustomed to sing the Sama hymns, the sages, Marichi, Pulaha, Bhrigu and
Angiras, chanted them at this spot. Here the lord of celestials
performeth with the Maruts his daily prayers. And the Sadhyas and the
Aswins attend on him. The sun, the moon and all the luminaries with the
planets resort to this river, alternately by day and by night. O highly
fortunate monarch, that protector of the world; Mahadeva, having a bull
for his mark, received on his head the fall of the waters of this river,
at the source of the Ganga. O children, approach this goddess of the six
attributes and bow down before her with concentrated minds.'
"Hearing the words of the high-souled Lomasa, the son of Pandu
reverentially worshipped the river (Ganga), flowing through the
firmament. And after having adored her the pious sons of Pandu resumed
their journey accompanied by the sages. And it came to pass that those
best of men beheld at a distance some white object of vast proportions,
even like Meru and stretching on all sides. And knowing that Pandu's sons
were intent upon asking (him), Lomasa versed in speech said, 'Hear, O
sons of Pandu! O best of men, what ye see before you, of vast proportions
like unto a mountain and beautiful as the Kailasa cliff, is a collection
of the bones of the mighty Daitya Naraka, Being placed on a mountain, it
looketh like one. The Daitya was slain by that Supreme Soul, the eternal
God Vishnu, for the good of the lord of celestials. Aiming at the
possession of Indra's place, by the force of austere and Vedic lore, that
mighty-minded (demon) had practised austere penances for ten thousand
years. And on account of his asceticism, as also of the force and might
of his arms he had grown invincible and always harassed (Indra). And O
sinless one, knowing his strength and austerities and observance of
religious vows, Indra became agitated and was overwhelmed with fear. And
mentally he thought of the eternal deity, Vishnu. And thereat the
graceful lord of the universe, who is present everywhere, appeared and
stood before him manifest. And the sages and celestials began to
propitiate Vishnu with prayers. And in his presence even Agni of the six
attributes and of blazing beauty being overpowered by his effulgence,
became shorn of radiance and seeing before him the God Vishnu, the chief
of the celestials who wields the thunder-bolt, bowing with head down
readily apprised Vishnu of the source of his fear. Thereupon Vishnu said,
'I know, O Sakra, that thy fear proceedeth from Naraka, that lord of the
Daityas. By the merit of his successful ascetic acts he aimeth at Indra's
position. Therefore, for pleasing thee, I shall certainly sever his soul
from his body, although he hath achieved success in asceticism. Do thou,
lord of celestials, wait for a moment.' Then the exceedingly powerful
Vishnu deprived (Naraka) of his senses (by striking him) with his hand.
And he fell down on the earth even like the monarch of mountains struck
by (thunder). He was thus slain by a miracle and his bones lie gathered
at this spot. Here also is manifest another deed of Vishnu's. Once the
whole earth having been lost and sunk into the nether regions she was
lifted up by him in the shape of a boar having a single tusk.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'O worshipful one, relate in particular how Vishnu,
the lord of the celestials, raised up the earth sunk a hundred yojanas?
In what manner also was that support of all created things--the goddess
Earth of high fortune--who dispenseth blessings and bringeth forth all
sorts of corn rendered stable? Through whose power had she sunk an
hundred yojanas below, and under what circumstances was exhibited this
greatest exploit of the Supreme Being? O chief of the twice-born race, I
wish to hear all about it in detail as it happened. Certainly, it is
known to thee.'
"Lomasa said, 'O Yudhishthira, listen to all at length as I relate the
story, which thou hast asked me (to narrate). O child, in days of yore,
there was (once) a terrible time in the Krita Yuga when the eternal and
primeval Deity assumed the duties of Yama. And, O thou that never fallest
off, when the God of gods began to perform the functions of Yama, there
died not a creature while the births were as usual. Then there began to
multiply birds and beasts and kine, and sheep, and deer and all kinds of
carnivorous animals. O tiger among men and vanquisher of foes, then the
human race also increased by thousands even like unto a current of water.
And, O my son, when the increase of population had been so frightful, the
Earth oppressed with the excessive burden, sank down for a hundred
yojanas. And suffering pain in all her limbs, and being deprived of her
senses by excessive pressure, the earth in distress sought the protection
of Narayana, the foremost of the gods. The earth spake saying, 'It is by
thy favour, O possessor of the six attributes, that I had been able to
remain so long in my position. But I have been overcome with burden and
now I cannot hold myself any longer. It behoveth thee, O adorable one, to
relieve this load of mine. I have sought thy protection. O lord; and do
thou, therefore, extend unto me thy favour.' Hearing these words of hers,
the eternal lord, possessor of the six attributes, complaisantly said, in
words uttered in distinct letters. Vishnu said, 'Thou need not fear, O
afflicted Earth, the bearer of all treasures. I shall act so that thou
mayst be made light.'
"Lomasa said, 'Having thus dismissed the Earth, who hath the mountains
for her ear-rings, he suddenly became turned into a boar with one tusk,
and of exceeding effulgence. Causing terror with his glowing red eyes and
emitting fumes from his blazing lustre, he began to swell in magnitude in
that region. O hero, then holding the earth with his single radiant tusk
that being who pervadeth the Vedas, raised her up a hundred yojanas. And
while she was being thus raised, there ensued a mighty agitation and all
the celestials, together with the sages of ascetic wealth became
agitated. And heaven, and the firmament, and also the Earth were filled
with exclamations of Oh! and Alas! and neither the celestials nor men
could rest in peace. Then countless celestials together with the sages
went to Brahma, who was seated burning as it were in his (own) lustre.
Then approaching Brahma, the lord of celestials, and the witness of the
acts of all beings, they with folded hands spake the following words, 'O
lord of the celestials, all created beings have become agitated and the
mobile and immobile creatures are restless. O lord of the celestials,
even the oceans are found to be agitated and this whole earth hath gone
down a hundred yojanas. What is the matter? And by whose influence is it
that the whole universe is in ferment? May it please thee to explain it
unto us without delay, for we are all bewildered.' Thereupon Brahma
replied, 'Ye immortals! do ye not entertain fear for the Asuras, in any
matter or place. Hearken, ye celestials, to the reason to which all this
commotion is owing! This agitation in the heavens hath been produced by
the influence of the illustrious Being who is omnipresent, eternal and
the never-perishing Soul. That Supreme soul, Vishnu hath lifted up the
Earth, who had entirely sunk down hundred yojanas. This commotion hath
taken place in consequence of the earth being raised up. Know ye this and
dispel your doubts.' The celestials said, 'Where is that Being who with
pleasure raiseth up the Earth? O possessor of the six attributes, mention
unto us the place. Thither shall we repair.' Brahma said 'Go ye. May good
happen to you! Ye will find him resting in the Nandana (gardens). Yonder
is visible the glorious worshipful Suparna (Garuda). After having raised
the Earth, the Supreme Being from whom the world become manifest, flameth
even in the shape of a boar, like unto the all-consuming fire at the
universal dissolution. And on his beast is really to be seen the gem
Srivatsa. (Go) and behold that Being knowing no deterioration.'
"Lomasa said, 'Then the celestials, placing the grandsire at their head,
came to that infinite Soul, and having listened to his praise, bade him
adieu and went back to whence they had come.'"
Vaisampayana said, "O Janamejaya, having heard this story, all the
Pandavas without delay and with alacrity, began to proceed by the way
pointed out by Lomasa."
