SECTION CXXXV
"Lomasa said, 'Here, O king, is visible the river Samanga, whose former
name was Madhuvila, and yonder is the spot named Kardamila, the bathing
place of Bharata. The lord of Sachi, when fallen into misery in
consequence of having slain Vritra, became freed from his sin, by
performing his ablutions in this Samanga. Here, O bull among men, is the
spot where the Mainaka mountain hath sunk into the interior of the earth;
and it is hence called Vinasana. For obtaining sons, here Aditi in days
of yore had cooked that celebrated food, (presided over by the Supreme
Being). O ye bulls among men, ascended this lofty mountain and put an end
to your inglorious misery unworthy to be uttered. Here, O king, before
thee is the Kanakhala range, the favourite resort of sages. 'And yonder
is the mighty river Ganga. Here, in ancient times, the holy sage
Sanatkumara attained ascetic success. O scion of the Ajamidha race, by
performing thy ablutions here in this river, thou wilt be freed from all
thy sins. O son of Kunti, do thou together with thy ministers, touch (the
waters) of this lake called Punya, and this mountain Bhrigutunga and also
(the water of) these two rivers, called Tushniganga. Here, O Kunti's son,
appeareth the hermitage of the sage Sthulasiras. Resign here thy anger
and sense of self-importance. There, O son of Pandu, is seen the
beautiful hermitage of Raivya, where perished Bharadwaja's son, Yavakari,
profound in Vedic lore.'"
"Yudhishthira said, 'How did the mighty sage, Yavakri, son of the ascetic
Bharadwaja, acquire profundity in the Vedas? And how also did he perish?
I am anxious to hear all this, just as it happened. I take delight in
listening to the narration of the deeds of god-like men.'"
"Lomasa said, 'Bharadwaja and Raivya were two friends. And they dwelt
here, ever taking the greatest pleasure in each other's company. Now,
Raivya had two sons, named Arvavasu and Paravasu. And, Bharadwaja, O
Bharata's son, had an only son, named Yavakri. Raivya and his two sons
were versed in the Vedas, while Bharadwaja practised asceticism. But, O
son of Bharata, from their boyhood, the friendship subsisting between
those two was unequalled. O sinless one, the highspirited Yavakri finding
that his father, who practised asceticism, was slighted by the Brahmanas,
while Raivya with his sons was greatly respected by them, was overwhelmed
with sorrow, and became sore aggrieved. Thereupon, O son of Pandu, he
entered upon severe austerities, for (obtaining) a knowledge of the
Vedas. And he exposed his body to a flaming fire. By thus practising the
most rigid austerities, he caused anxiety in the mind of Indra. Then
Indra, O Yudhishthira, went to him and addressed him saying, 'Wherefore,
O sage, hast thou become engaged in practising such rigid austerities?'
Yavakri said, 'O thou adored of celestial hosts, I am practising severe
penances, because I wish that such a knowledge of the Vedas as hath never
been acquired by any Brahmana whatever, may be manifest unto me. O
conqueror of Paka, these endeavours of mine have been for Vedic lore. O
Kausika, by the force of my asceticism. I purpose to obtain all sorts of
knowledge. O lord, a knowledge of the Vedas as learnt through teachers,
is acquired in a long time. Therefore, (with the view of attaining in
short time a proficiency in the Vedas), I have put forth these high
endeavours.' Indra said, 'O Brahmana sage, the way that thou hast adopted
is not the proper way. What for, O Brahamana, wilt thou destroy thyself?
Go and learn from the lips of a preceptor.'
"Lomasa said, 'O son of Bharata, having said this, Sakra went away, and
Yavakri of immeasurable energy, once more directed his attention to
asceticism. O king, we have heard that carrying on severe austerities he
again greatly agitated Indra. And the god Indra, slayer of Vala, again
came unto that great sage, who was engaged in austere penances; and
forbade him, saying, Thou art striving with the object that Vedic lore
may be manifest unto thee as well as unto thy father; but thy exertions
can never be successful, nor is this act of thine well-advised.' Yavakri
said, 'O lord of the celestials, if thou wilt not do for me what I want,
I shall, observing stricter vows, practise still severer penances. O lord
of celestials! know that if thou do not fulfil all my desires, I shall
then cut off my limbs and offer them as a sacrifice into a blazing fire.'
"Lomasa said, 'Knowing the determination of that high-souled sage, the
sagacious Indra reflected and hit upon some expedient to dissuade him.
Then Indra assumed the guise of an ascetic Brahmana, hundreds of years
old, and infirm, and suffering from consumption. And he fell to throwing
up a dam with sands, at that spot of the Bhagirathi to which Yavakri used
to descend for performing ablutions. Because Yavakri, chief of the
Brahmanas, paid no heed to Indra's words, the latter began to fill the
Ganga with sands. And without cessation, he threw handfuls of sand into
the Bhagirathi, and began to construct the dam attracting the notice of
the sage. And when that bull among the sages, Yavakri, saw Indra thus
earnestly engaged in constructing the dam, he broke into laughter, and
said the following words, 'What art thou engaged in, O Brahmana, and what
is thy object? Why dost thou, for nothing, make this mighty endeavour?'
Indra said, 'I am trying, O my son, to dam the Ganga so that there may be
a commodious passage. People experience considerable difficulty in
crossing and recrossing (the river) by boat.' Yavakri said, 'O thou of
ascetic wealth, thou canst not dam up this mighty current. O Brahmana,
desist from, what is impracticable, and take up something that is
practicable.' Indra said, 'O sage, I have imposed on myself this heavy
task, even as, for obtaining a knowledge of the Vedas, thou hast begun
these penances, which can never be fruitful.' Yavakri said, 'If, O chief
of the celestials, those efforts of mine be fruitless, even as those of
thy own, then, O lord of heavenly hosts, be thou pleased to do for me
what is practicable. Vouchsafe unto me boons whereby I may excel other
men.'
"Lomasa said 'Then Indra granted boons, as was prayed for by the mighty
ascetic, Indra said, 'As thou desirest, the Vedas will be manifest unto
thee, yea--even unto thy father. And all thy other desires will also be
fulfilled. Return home, O Yavakri.'
"Having thus obtained the object of his desire, Yavakri came unto his
father and said, The Vedas, O father, will be manifest unto thee as well
as unto myself and I have obtained boons whereby we shall excel all men.'
Thereat Bharadwaja said, 'O my son, as thou hast obtained the objects of
thy desire, thou wilt be proud. And when thou art puffed up with pride
and hast also become uncharitable, destruction will soon overtake thee. O
my son, there is a current anecdote narrated by the gods. In ancient
times, O son, there lived a sage named Valadhi, possessed of great
energy. And in grief for the death of a child, he practised the severest
penances to have a child that should be immortal. And he obtained a son
even as he desired. But the gods, though very favourably disposed
(towards him), did not yet make his son immortal like unto the gods. They
said, 'On condition can a mortal being be made immortal. Thy son's life,
however, shall depend on some instrumental cause.' Thereupon, Valadhi
said, 'O chiefs of the celestials, these mountains have been existing
eternally, and indestructible, let them be the instrumental cause of my
son's life. Afterwards a son was born to the sage, named Medhavi. And he
was of a very irritable temper. And hearing of (the incident of his
birth), he grew haughty, and began to insult the sages. And he ranged
over the earth, doing mischief to the munis. And one day, meeting with
the learned sage Dhannushaksha endued with energy. Medhavi maltreated
him. Thereupon, the former cursed him, saying, 'Be thou reduced to
ashes.' Medhavi, however, was not reduced to ashes. Then Dhannushaksha
caused the mountain which was the instrumental cause of Medhavi's life,
to be shattered by buffaloes. And the boy perished, with the destruction
of the instrumental cause of his life. And embracing his dead son,
Medhavi's father began to bewail his fate. Now hear from me, O my son,
what was chanted by the sages conversant with the Vedas, when they found
the sage mourning. A mortal on no condition whatever can overcome what
hath been ordained by Fate, Lo! Dhannushaksha succeeded in shattering
even the mountain by buffaloes. Thus young ascetics, puffed up with pride
for having obtained boons, perish in a short time. Be thou not one of
them. This Raivya, O my son, is possessed of great energy, and his two
sons are like him. Therefore, be thou vigilant--so as never to approach
him. O my son, Raivya is a great ascetic of an irritable temper. When
angry, he can do thee harm. Yavakri said, 'I shall do as thou biddest me.
Of father, do thou not by any means entertain anxiety for that. Raivya
deserveth my regard even as thou, my father.' Having replied unto his
father in these sweet words, Yavakri, fearing nothing and nobody, began
to delight in wantonly offending other munis."
