SECTION CLII
Vaisampayana said, "Having reached that spot, Bhimasena saw in the
vicinity of the Kailasa cliff, that beautiful lotus lake surrounded by
lovely woods, and guarded by the Rakshasas. And it sprang from the
cascades contiguous to the abode of Kuvera. And it was beautiful to
behold, and was furnished with a wide-spreading shade and abounded in
various trees and creepers and was covered with green lilies. And this
unearthly lake was filled with golden lotuses, and swarmed with diverse
species of birds. And its banks were beautiful and devoid of mud. And
situated on the rocky elevation this expanse of excellent water was
exceedingly fair. And it was the wonder of the world and healthful and of
romantic sight. In that lake the son of Kunti saw, the water of ambrosial
taste and cool and light and clear and fresh; and the Pandava drank of it
profusely. And that unearthly receptacle of waters was covered with
celestial Saugandhika lotuses, and was also spread over with beautiful
variegated golden lotuses of excellent fragrance having graceful stalks
of lapis lazulis. And swayed by swans and Karandavas, these lotuses were
scattering fresh farina. And this lake was the sporting region of the
high-souled Kuvera, the king of the Yakshas. And it was held in high
regard by the Gandharvas the Apsaras and the celestials. And it was
frequented by the celestial sages and the Yakshas and the Kimpurushas and
the Rakshasas and the Kinnaras; and it was well-protected by Kuvera. And
as soon as he beheld that river and that unearthly lake, Kunti's son,
Bhimasena of mighty strength became exceedingly delighted. And agreeably
to the mandate of their king, hundreds and thousands of Rakshasas, named
Krodhavasas, were guarding that lake, wearing uniforms and armed with
various weapons. And as that repressor of foes, Kunti's son, the heroic
Bhima of dreadful prowess, clad in deer-skins and wearing golden armlets
and equipped with weapons and girding his sword on, was fearlessly
proceeding, with the view of gathering the lotus, those (Rakshasas) saw
him and immediately began to address each other, shouting forth, 'It
behoveth you to enquire for the errand on which this foremost of men,
clad in deer skins, and equipped with arms, hath come.' Then they all
approached the effulgent Vrikodara of mighty arms and asked, 'Who art
thou? Thou shouldst answer our questions. We see thee in the guise of an
ascetic and yet armed with weapons. O thou of mighty intelligence, do
thou unfold unto us the object with which thou hast come (hither)."
