SECTION CL
Vaisampayana said, "Then contracting that huge body of his, which he had
assumed at will, the monkey with his arms again embraced Bhimasena. And O
Bharata, on Bhima being embraced by his brother, his fatigue went off,
and all (the powers of body) as also his strength were restored. And
having gained great accession of strength, he thought that there was none
equal to him in physical power. And with tears in his eyes, the monkey
from affection again addressed Bhima in choked utterance, saying, 'O
hero, repair to thy own abode. May I be incidentally remembered by thee
in thy talk! O best of Kurus, do not tell any one that I abide here. O
thou of great strength, the most excellent of the wives of the gods and
Gandharvas resort to this place, and the time of their arrival is nigh.
My eyes have been blessed (by seeing thee). And, O Bhima, having felt a
human being by coming in contact with thee, I have been put in mind of
that son of Raghu, who was Vishnu himself under the name of Rama, and who
delighted the heart of the world; and who was as the sun in regard to the
lotus face of Sita, and also to that darkness--Ravana. Therefore, O
heroic son of Kunti, let not thy meeting with me be fruitless. Do thou
with fraternal feeling ask of me a boon, O Bharata. If this be thy wish,
that going to Varanavata, I may destroy the insignificant sons of
Dhritarashtra--even this will I immediately do. Or if this be thy wish
that, that city may be ground by me with rocks, or that I may bind
Duryodhana and bring him before thee, even this will I do to-day, O thou
of mighty strength.'
Vaisampayana said, "Hearing those words of that high-souled one,
Bhimasena with a cheerful heart answered Hanuman, saying, 'O foremost of
monkeys, I take all this as already performed by thee. Good happen to
thee. O mighty-armed one! I ask of thee this,--be thou well pleased with
me. O powerful one, on thy having become our protector, the Pandavas have
found help. Even by thy prowess shall we conquer all foes." Thus
addressed, Hanuman said unto Bhimasena, 'From fraternal feeling and
affection, I will do good unto thee, by diving into the army of thy foes
copiously furnished with arrows and javelins. And, O highly powerful one,
O hero, when thou shall give leonine roars, then shall I with my own, add
force to shouts. Remaining on the flagstaff of Arjuna's car will I emit
fierce shouts that will damp the energy of thy foes. Thereby ye will slay
them easily.' Having said this unto Pandu's son, and also pointed him out
the way. Hanuman vanished at that spot."
