SECTION CXLVI
Vaisampayana said, "O represser of foes, hearing these words of the
intelligent monkey-chief, the heroic Bhima answered, 'Who art thou? And
why also hast thou assumed the shape of a monkey? It is a Kshatriya--one
of a race next to the Brahmanas--that asketh thee. And he belongeth to
the Kuru race and the lunar stock, and was borne by Kunti in her womb,
and is one of the sons of Pandu, and is the off spring of the wind-god,
and is known by the name of Bhimasena.' Hearing these words of the Kuru
hero, Hanuman smiled, and that son of the wind-god (Hanuman) spake unto
that offspring of the wind-god (Bhimasena), saying, 'I am a monkey, I
will not allow thee the passage thou desirest. Better desist and go back.
Do thou not meet with destruction.' At this Bhimasena replied.
'Destruction at anything else do I not ask thee about, O monkey. Do thou
give me passage. Arise! Do not come by grief at my hands.' Hanuman said,
'I have no strength to rise; I am suffering from illness. If go thou
must, do thou go by overleaping me.' Bhima said, 'The Supreme Soul void
of the properties pervadeth a body all over. Him knowable alone by
knowledge, I cannot disregard. And therefore, will I not overleap thee.
If I had not known Him from Whom become manifest all creatures, I would
have leapt over thee and also the mountain, even as Hanuman had bounded
over the ocean.' Thereupon Hanuman said, 'Who is that Hanuman, who had
bounded over the ocean? I ask thee, O best of men. Relate if thou canst.'
Bhima replied, "He is even my brother, excellent with every perfection,
and endued with intelligence and strength both of mind and body. And he
is the illustrious chief of monkeys, renowned in the Ramayana. And for
Rama's queen, that king of the monkeys even with one leap crossed the
ocean extending over a hundred yojanas. That mighty one is my brother. I
am equal unto him in energy, strength and prowess and also in fight. And
able am I to punish thee. So arise. Either give me passage or witness my
prowess to-day. If thou do not listen to my bidding, I shall send thee to
the abode of Yama."
Vaisampayana continued. "Then knowing him (Bhima) to be intoxicated with
strength, and proud of the might of his arms, Hanuman, slighting him at
heart, said the following words, 'Relent thou, O sinless one. In
consequence of age, I have no strength to get up. From pity for me, do
thou go, moving aside my tail.' Being thus addressed by Hanuman, Bhima
proud of the strength of his arms, took him for one wanting in energy and
prowess, and thought within himself, 'Taking fast hold of the tail, will
I send this monkey destitute of energy and prowess, to the region of
Yama.' Thereat, with a smile he slightingly took hold of the tail with
his left hand; but could not move that tail of the mighty monkey. Then
with both arms he pulled it, resembling the pole reared in honour of
Indra. Still the mighty Bhima could not raise the tail with both his
arms. And his eye-brows were contracted up, and his eyes rolled, and his
face was contracted into wrinkles and his body was covered with sweat;
and yet he could not raise it. And when after having striven, the
illustrious Bhima failed in raising the tail, he approached the side of
the monkey, and stood with a bashful countenance. And bowing down,
Kunti's son, with joined hands, spake these words, 'Relent thou, O
foremost of monkeys; and forgive me for my harsh words. Art thou a
Siddha, or a god, or a Gandharva, or a Guhyaka? I ask thee out of
curiosity. Tell me who thou art that hast assumed the shape of monkey, if
it be not a secret, O long-armed one, and if I can well hear it. I ask
thee as a disciple, and I, O sinless one, seek thy refuge.' Thereupon
Hanuman said, 'O represser of foes, even to the extent of thy curiosity
to know me, shall I relate all at length. Listen, O son of Pandu! O
lotus-eyed one, I was begotten by the wind-god that life of the
world--upon the wife of Kesari. I am a monkey, by name Hanuman. All the
mighty monkey-kings, and monkey-chiefs used to wait upon that son of the
sun, Sugriva, and that son of Sakra, Vali. And, O represser of foes, a
friendship subsisted between me and Sugriva, even as between the wind and
fire. And for some cause, Sugriva, driven out by his brother, for a long
time dwelt with me at the Hrisyamukh. And it came to pass that the mighty
son of Dasaratha the heroic Rama, who is Vishnu's self in the shape of a
human being, took his birth in this world. And in company with his queen
and brother, taking his bow, that foremost of bowmen with the view of
compassing his father's welfare, began to reside in the Dandaka forest.
And from Janasthana, that mighty Rakshasa monarch, the wicked Ravana,
carried away his (Rama's) queen by stratagem and force, deceiving, O
sinless one, that foremost of men, through the agency of a Rakshasa,
Maricha, who assumed the form of a deer marked with gem-like and golden
spots."
