SECTION CXLV
Vaisampayana said, "There observing cleanliness, those tigers among men
dwelt for six nights, in expectation of beholding Dhananjaya. And it came
to pass that all of a sudden there blew a wind from the north-east and
brought a celestial lotus of a thousand petals and effulgent as the sun.
And Panchali saw that pure and charming lotus of unearthly fragrance,
brought by the wind and left on the ground. And having obtained that
excellent and beautiful lotus, that blessed one became exceedingly
delighted, O king, and addressed Bhimasena in the following words,
'Behold, O Bhima, this most beautiful unearthly flower having within it
the very source of fragrance. It gladdenth my heart, O represser of foes.
This one shall be presented to Yudhishthira the just. Do thou, therefore,
procure others for my satisfaction--in order that I may carry them to our
hermitage in the Kamyaka. If, O Pritha's son, I have found grace with
thee, do thou then procure others of this species in large numbers. I
wish to carry them to our hermitage.' Having said this, the blameless
lady of beautiful glances approached Yudhishthira the just, taking the
flower. And knowing the desire of his beloved queen that bull among men,
Bhima of great strength, also set out, in order to gratify her. And
intent upon fetching the flowers, he began to proceed at rapid space,
facing the wind, in the direction from which the flower had come. And
taking the bow inlaid with gold on the back as also arrows like unto
venomous snakes, he proceeded as a lion in anger or an elephant in rut.
And all beings gazed at him, holding a mighty bow and arrows. And neither
exhaustion, nor langour, neither fear nor confusion, ever possessed the
son of Pritha and the offspring of Vayu (wind). And desirous of pleasing
Draupadi the mighty one, free from fear or confusion, ascended the peak
depending on the strength of his arms. And that slayer of foes began to
range that beautiful peak covered with trees, creepers and of black rocky
base; and frequented by Kinnaras; and variegated with minerals, plants,
beasts, and birds of various hues; and appearing like an upraised arm of
the Earth adorned with an entire set of ornaments. And that one of
matchless prowess proceeded, fixing his look at the slopes of the
Gandhamadana,--beautiful with flowers of every season--and revolving
various thoughts in his mind and with his ears, eyes and mind rivetted to
the spots resounding with the notes of male kokilas and ringing with the
hum of black bees. And like an elephant in rut ranging mad in a forest
that one of mighty prowess smelt the rare odour proceeding from the
flowers of every season. And he was fanned by the fresh breeze of the
Gandhamadana bearing the perfumes of various blossoms and cooling like
unto a father's touch. On his fatigue being removed the down on his body
stood on end. And in this state that represser of foes for the flowers
began to survey all the mountain, inhabited by Yakshas and Gandharvas and
celestials and Brahmarshis. And brushed by the leaves of Saptachchada
tree, besmeared with fresh red, black and white minerals, he looked as if
decorated with lines of holy unguents drawn by fingers. And with clouds
stretching at its sides, the mountain seemed dancing with outspread
wings. And on account of the trickling waters of springs, it appeared to
be decked with necklaces of pearls. And it contained romantic caverns and
groves and cascades and caves. And there were excellent peacocks dancing
to the jingling of the bangles of the Apsaras. And its rocky surface was
worn away by the end of tusks of the elephants presiding over the
cardinal points. And with the waters of rivers falling down, the mountain
looked as if its clothes were getting loosened. And that graceful son of
the wind-god playfully and cheerfully went on, pushing away by his force
countless intertwisted creepers. And stags in curiosity gazed at him,
with grass in their mouths. And not having experienced fear (ever
before), they were unalarmed, and did not flee away. And being engaged in
fulfilling the desire of his love, the youthful son of Pandu, stalwart
and of splendour like unto the hue of gold; and having a body strong as a
lion; and treading like a mad elephant; and possessing the force of a mad
elephant; and having coppery eyes like unto those of a mad elephant; and
capable of checking a mad elephant began to range the romantic sides of
the Gandhamadana with his beautiful eyes uplifted; and displaying as it
were a novel type of beauty. And the wives of Yakshas and Gandharvas
sitting invisible by the side of their husbands, stared at him, turning
their faces with various motions. Intent upon gratifying Draupadi exiled
unto the woods, as he was ranging the beautiful Gandhamadana, he
remembered the many and various woes caused by Duryodhana. And he
thought, 'Now that Arjuna sojourn in heaven and that I too have come away
to procure the flowers, what will our brother Yudhishthira do at present?
Surely, from affection and doubting their prowess, that foremost of men,
Yudhishthira, will not let Nakula and Sahadeva come in search of us. How,
again, can I obtain the flowers soon?' Thinking thus, that tiger among
men proceeded in amain like unto the king of birds, his mind and sight
fixed on the delightful side of the mountain. And having for his
provisions on the journey the words of Draupadi, the mighty son of Pandu,
Vrikodara Bhima, endued with strength and the swiftness of the wind, with
his mind and sight fixed on the blooming slopes of the mountain,
proceeded speedily, making the earth tremble with his tread, even as doth
a hurricane at the equinox; and frightening herds of elephants and
grinding lions and tigers and deer and uprooting and smashing large trees
and tearing away by force plants and creepers, like unto an elephant
ascending higher and higher the summit of a mountain; and roaring
fiercely even as a cloud attended with thunder. And awakened by that
mighty roaring of Bhima, tigers came out of their dens, while other
rangers of the forest hid themselves. And the coursers of the skies
sprang up (on their wing) in fright. And herds of deer hurriedly ran
away. And birds left the trees (and fled). And lions forsook their dens.
And the mighty lions were roused from their slumber. And the buffaloes
stared. And the elephants in fright, leaving that wood, ran to more
extensive forests company with their mates. And the boars and the deer
and the lions and the buffaloes and the tigers and the jackals and the
gavayas of the wood began to cry in herds. And the ruddy geese, and the
gallinules and the ducks and the karandavas and the plavas and the
parrots and the male kokilas and the herons in confusion flew in all
directions, while some proud elephants urged by their mates, as also some
lions and elephants in rage, flew at Bhimasena. And as they were
distracted at heart through fear, these fierce animals discharging urine
and dung, set up loud yells with gapping mouths. Thereupon the
illustrious and graceful son of the wind-god, the mighty Pandava,
depending upon the strength of his arms, began to slay one elephant with
another elephant and one lion with another lion while he despatched the
others with slaps. And on being struck by Bhima the lions and the tigers
and the leopards, in fright gave loud cries and discharged urine and
dung. And after having destroyed these the handsome son of Pandu,
possessed of mighty strength, entered into the forest, making all sides
resound with his shouts. And then the long-armed one saw on the slopes of
the Gandhamadana a beautiful plantain tree spreading over many a yojana.
And like unto a mad lion, that one of great strength proceeded amain
towards that tree breaking down various plants. And that foremost of
strong persons--Bhima--uprooting innumerable plantain trunks equal in
height to many palm-trees (placed one above another), cast them on all
sides with force. And that highly powerful one, haughty like a male lion,
sent up shouts. And then he encountered countless beasts of gigantic
size, and stags, and monkeys, and lions, and buffaloes, and aquatic
animals. And what with the cries of these, and what with the shouts of
Bhima, even the beasts and birds that were at distant parts of the wood,
became all frightened. And hearing those cries of beasts and birds,
myriads of aquatic fowls suddenly rose up on wetted wings. And seeing
these fowls of water, that bull among the Bharatas proceeded in that
direction; and saw a vast and romantic lake. And that fathomless lake
was, as it were, being fanned by the golden plantain trees on the coast,
shaken by the soft breezes. And immediately descending into the lake
abounding in lilies and lotuses, he began to sport lustily like unto a
mighty maddened elephant. Having thus sported there for a long while, he
of immeasurable effulgence ascended, in order to penetrate with speed
into that forest filled with trees. Then the Pandava winded with all his
might his loud-blowing shell. And striking his arms with his hands, the
mighty Bhima made all the points of heaven resound. And filled with the
sounds of the shell, and with the shouts of Bhimasena, and also with the
reports produced by the striking of his arms, the caves of the mountain
seemed as if they were roaring. And hearing those loud arm-strokes, like
unto the crashing of thunder, the lions that were slumbering in the
caves, uttered mighty howls. And being terrified by the yelling of the
lions, the elephants, O Bharata, sent forth tremendous roars, which
filled the mountain. And hearing those sounds emitted, and knowing also
Bhimasena to be his brother, the ape Hanuman, the chief of monkeys, with
the view of doing good to Bhima, obstructed the path leading to heaven.
And thinking that he (Bhima) should not pass that way,(Hanuman) lay
across the narrow path, beautified by plantain trees, obstructing it for
the sake of the safety of Bhima. With the object that Bhima might not
come by curse or defeat, by entering into the plantain wood, the ape
Hanuman of huge body lay down amidst the plantain trees, being overcome
with drowsiness. And he began to yawn, lashing his long tail, raised like
unto the pole consecrated to Indra, and sounding like thunder. And on all
sides round, the mountains by the mouths of caves emitted those sounds in
echo, like a cow lowing. And as it was being shaken by the reports
produced by the lashing of the tail, the mountain with its summits
tottering, began to crumble all around. And overcoming that roaring of
mad elephants, the sounds of his tail spread over the varied slopes of
the mountain.
"On those sounds being heard the down of Bhima's body stood on end; and
he began to range that plantain wood, in search of those sounds. And that
one of mighty arms saw the monkey-chief in the plantain wood, on an
elevated rocky base. And he was hard to be looked at even as the
lightning-flash; and of coppery hue like that of the lightning-flash: and
endued with the voice of the lightning-flash; and quick moving as the
lightning-flash; and having his short flesh neck supported on his
shoulders; and with his waist slender in consequence of the fullness of
his shoulders. And his tail covered with long hair, and a little bent at
the end, was raised like unto a banner. And (Bhima) saw Hanuman's head
furnished with small lips, and coppery face and tongue, and red ears, and
brisk eyes, and bare white incisors sharpened at the edge.' And his head
was like unto the shining moon; adorned with white teeth within the
mouth; and with mane scattered over, resembling a heap of asoka flowers.
And amidst the golden plantain trees, that one of exceeding effulgence
was lying like unto a blazing fire, with his radiant body. And that
slayer of foes as casting glances with his eyes reddened with
intoxication. And the intelligent Bhima saw that mighty chief of monkeys,
of huge body, lying like unto the Himalaya, obstructing the path of
heaven. And seeing him alone in that mighty forest, the undaunted
athletic Bhima, of long arms, approached him with rapid strides, and
uttered a loud shout like unto the thunder. And at that shout of Bhima,
beasts and birds became all alarmed. The powerful Hanuman, however,
opening his eyes partially looked at him (Bhima) with disregard, with
eyes reddened with intoxication. And then smilingly addressing him,
Hanuman said the following words, 'Ill as I am, I was sleeping sweetly.
Why hast thou awakened me? Thou shouldst show kindness to all creatures,
as thou hast reason. Belonging to the animal species, we are ignorant of
virtue. But being endued with reason, men show kindness towards
creatures. Why do then reasonable persons like thee commit themselves to
acts contaminating alike body, speech, and heart, and destructive of
virtue? Thou knowest not what virtue is, neither hast thou taken council
of the wise. And therefore it is that from ignorance, and childishness
thou destroyest the lower animals. Say, who art thou, and what for hast
thou come to the forest devoid of humanity and human beings? And, O
foremost of men, tell thou also, whither thou wilt go to-day. Further it
is impossible to proceed. Yonder hills are inaccessible. O hero, save the
passage obtained by the practice of asceticism, there is no passage to
that place. This is the path of the celestials; it is ever impassable by
mortals. Out of kindness, O hero, do I dissuade thee. Do thou hearken
unto my words. Thou canst not proceed further from this place. Therefore,
O lord, do thou desist. O chief of men, to-day in very way thou art
welcome to this place. If thou think it proper to accept my words, do
thou then, O best of men, rest here, partaking of fruits and roots, sweet
as ambrosia, and do not have thyself destroyed for naught."
