SECTION CLXI
"The lord of treasures said, 'O Yudhishthira, patience, ability,
(appropriate) time and place and prowess--these five lead to success in
human affairs. O Bharata, in the Krita Yuga, men were patient and able in
their respective occupations and they knew how to display prowess. And, O
foremost of the Kshatriyas, a Kshatriya that is endued with patience and
understandeth the propriety regarding place and time and is versed in all
mortal regulations, can alone govern the world for a long time,--nay, in
all transactions. He that behaveth thus, acquireth, O hero, fame in this
world and excellent state in the next. And by having displayed his
prowess at the proper place and time, Sakra with the Vasus hath obtained
the dominion of heaven. He that from anger cannot see his fall and he
that being naturally wicked and evilminded followeth evil and he that
knoweth not the propriety relative to acts, meet with destruction both in
this world and the next. The exertions of that stupid person become
fruitless, who is not conversant with the expediency regarding time and
acts, and he meeteth with destruction both in this world and the next.
And the object of that wicked and deceitful persons is vicious, who,
aiming at mastery of every kind, committeth some rash act. O best of men,
Bhimasena is fearless, and ignorant of duties, and haughty, and of the
sense of a child, and unforbearing. Do thou, therefore, check him.
Repairing again to the hermitage of the pious sage Arshtisena, do thou
reside there during the dark fortnight, without fear or anxiety. O lord
of men, deputed by me, all the Gandharvas residing at Alaka, as also
those dwelling in this mountain, will, O mighty-armed one, protect thee,
and these best of the Brahmanas. And, O king, O chief among virtuous men,
knowing that Vrikodara hath come hither out of rashness, do thou check
him. Henceforth, O monarch, beings living in the forest will meet you,
wait upon you and always protect you all. And, ye foremost of men, my
servants will always procure for you various meats and drinks of
delicious flavour. And, O son, Yudhishthira, even as by reason of your
being the progeny of spiritual intercourse, Jishnu is entitled to the
protection of Mahendra, and Vrikodara, of the Wind-god, and thou, of
Dharma, and the twins possessed of strength, of the Aswins,--so ye all
are entitled to my protection. That one next by birth to Bhimasena,
Phalguna, versed in the science of profit and all mortal regulations, is
well in heaven. And, O child, those perfections that are recognised in
the world as leading to heaven, are established in Dhananjaya even from
his very birth. And self-restraint, and charity, and strength, and
intelligence, and modesty, and fortitude, and excellent energy--even all
these are established in that majestic one of magnificent soul. And, O
Pandava, Jishnu never committed any shameful act through poverty of
spirit. And in the world, none ever say that Partha hath uttered an
untruth. And, O Bharata, honoured by the gods, pitris, and the
Gandharvas, that enhancer of the glory of the Kurus is learning the
science of weapons in Sakra's abode. And, O Partha, in heaven he that
with justice had brought under his subjection all the rulers of the
earth, even that exceedingly powerful and highly energetic monarch, the
grandsire of thy father, Santanu himself, is well-pleased with the
behaviour of that wielder of the Gandiva--the foremost of his race. And,
O king, abiding in Indra's regions, he who on the banks of the Yamuna had
worshipped the gods, the pitris, and the Brahmanas, by celebrating seven
grand horse sacrifices, that great grandsire of thine, the emperor
Santanu of severe austerities, who hath attained heaven, hath enquired of
thy welfare.'"
Vaisampayana said, "Having heard these words of the dispenser of wealth,
the Pandavas were well-pleased with them. Then lowering his club and mace
and sword and bow, that foremost of the Bharatas bowed down unto Kuvera.
And that giver of protection, the lord of treasures, seeing him
prostrate, said, 'Be thou the destroyer of the pride of foes, and the
enhancer of the delight of friends. And ye oppressors of enemies, do ye
live in our romantic region. The Yakshas will not cross your desires.
Gudakesa, after having acquired mastery over weapons, will come back
soon. Bidden adieu by Maghavat himself, Dhananjaya will join you.'
"Having thus instructed Yudhishthira of excellent deeds, the lord of the
Guhyakas, vanished from that best of mountains. And thousands upon
thousands of Yakshas, and Rakshasas followed him in vehicles spread over
with checkered cushions, and decorated with various jewels. And as the
horses proceeded towards the abode of Kuvera, a noise arose as of birds
flying in the air. And the chargers of the lord of treasures speedily
coursed through the sky as if drawing forward the firmament, and
devouring the air.
"Then at the command of the lord of wealth, the dead bodies of the
Rakshasas were removed from the summit of the mountain. As the
intelligent Agastya had fixed this period as the limit of (the duration
of) his curse, so being slain in conflict, the Rakshasas were freed from
the imprecation. And being honoured by the Rakshasas, the Pandavas for
several nights dwelt pleasantly in those habitations."
