SECTION CLVIII
Vaisampayana continued, "Having approached that one, whose sins had been
consumed by asceticism, Yudhishthira announced his name, and gladly
greeted him, bending his head. And then Krishna, and Bhima, and the
devout twins, having bowed down their heads unto the royal sage, stood
(there) surrounding him. And that priest of the Pandavas, the virtuous
Dhaumya, also duly approached that vow-observing sage. And by his
prophetic eye that virtuous Muni had already known (the identity of)
those foremost of the Kurus, the sons of Pandu. And he said unto them.
'Be ye seated.' And that one of rigid austerities, after having duly
received that chief of the Kurus, when the latter with his brothers had
seated himself enquired after his welfare saying, 'Dost thou not turn thy
inclination upon untruth? And art thou intent upon virtue? And. O Partha,
hath not thy attention to thy father and thy mother diminished? Are all
thy superiors, and the aged, and those versed in the Vedas, honoured by
thee? And O Pritha's son, dost thou not turn thy inclination unto sinful
acts? And dost thou, O best of the Kurus, properly know how to perform
meritorious acts, and to eschew wicked deeds? Dost thou not exalt
thyself? And are pious men gratified, being honoured by thee? And even
dwelling in the woods, dost thou follow virtue alone? And, O Partha, doth
not Dhaumya grieve at thy conduct? Dost thou follow the customs of thy
ancestors, by charity, and religious observances, and asceticism, and
purity, and candour, and forgiveness? And dost thou go along the way
taken by the royal sages? On the birth of a son in their (respective)
lines, the Pitris in their regions, both laugh and grieve, thinking--Will
the sinful acts of this son of ours harm us, or will meritorious deeds
conduce to our welfare? He conquereth both the worlds that payeth homage
unto his father, and mother, and preceptor, and Agni, and fifthly, the
soul.' Yudhishthira said, 'O worshipful one, those duties have been
mentioned by thee as excellent. To the best of my power I duly and
properly discharge them.'
Arshtishena said, 'During the Parvas sages subsisting on air and water
come unto this best of the mountains ranging through the air. And on the
summits of the mountain are seen amorous Kimpurushas with their
paramours, mutually attached unto each other; as also, O Partha, many
Gandharvas and Apsaras clad in white silk vestments; and lovely-looking
Vidyadharas, wearing garlands; and mighty Nagas, and Suparnas, and
Uragas, and others. And on the summits of the mountain are heard, during
the Parvas, sounds of kettle-drums, and tabors, shells and mridangas. O
foremost of the Bharatas, even by staying here, ye shall hear those
sounds; do ye by no means feel inclined to repair thither. Further, O
best of the Bharata race, it is impossible, to proceed beyond this. That
place is the sporting-region of the celestials. There is no access
thither for mortals. O Bharata, at this place all creatures bear ill-will
to, and the Rakshasas chastise, that man who committeth aggression, be it
ever so little. Beyond the summit of this Kailasa cliff, is seen the path
of the celestial sages. If any one through impudence goeth beyond this,
the Rakshasas slay him with iron darts and other weapons. There, O child,
during the Parvas, he that goeth about on the shoulders of men, even
Vaisravana is seen in pomp and grandeur surrounded by the Apsaras. And
when that lord of all the Rakshasas is seated on the summit, all
creatures behold him like unto the sun arisen, O best of Bharatas, that
summit is the sporting-garden of the celestials, and the Danavas, and the
Siddhas, and Vaisravana. And during the Parvas, as Tumburu entertaineth
the Lord of treasures, the sweet notes of his song are heard all over the
Gandhamadana. O child, O Yudhishthira, here during the Parvas, all
creatures see and hear marvels like this. O Pandavas, till ye meet with
Arjuna, do ye stay here, partaking of luscious fruits, and the food of
the Munis. O child as thou hast come hither, do thou not betray any
impertinence. And, O child, after living here at thy will and diverting
thyself as thou listest, thou wilt at length rule the earth, having
conquered it by the force of thy arms.'"
