SECTION CLXXV
Janamejaya said, "When that prime among heroes, having been accomplished
in arms, had returned from the abode of the slayer of Vritra, what did
Pritha's sons do in company with the warlike Dhananjaya?"
Vaisampayana said, "In company with that hero equal unto Indra,
Arjuna--that foremost of men, sported in the pleasure-gardens of the lord
of treasures (situated) in those woods on that romantic and excellent
mountain. And surveying those peerless and various pleasure-grounds
filled with diverse trees, that chief of men, Kiriti, ever intent upon
arms, ranged at large, bow in hand. And having through the grace of king
Vaisravana obtained a residence, those sons of a sovereign cared not for
the prosperity of men. And, O king, that period of their (lives) passed
peacefully. And having Partha in their company, they spent four years
there even like a single night. And as the Pandavas lived in the wood,
(these four years) and the former six, numbering ten, passed smoothly
with them.
"Then having seated themselves before the king, the vehement son of the
Wind-god, with Jishnu and the heroic twins, like unto the lord of the
celestials, earnestly addressed the king in these beneficial and pleasant
words. 'It is only to render thy promise effectual and to advance thy
interests, that, O king of the Kurus, forsaking the forest, we do not go
to slay Suyodhana together with all his followers. Although deserving of
happiness, yet have we been deprived of happiness. And this is the
eleventh year that (in this state) we have been living (in the forest).
And hereafter, deluding that one of evil mind and character, shall we
easily live out the period of non-discovery. And at thy mandate, O
monarch, free from apprehension, we have been ranging the woods, having
relinquished our honour. Having been tempted by our residence in the
vicinity, they (our enemies) will not believe that we have removed to a
distant realm. And after having lived there undiscovered for a year, and
having wreaked our revenge on that wicked wight, Suyodhana, with his
followers, we shall easily root out that meanest of men, slaying him and
regaining our kingdom. Therefore, O Dharmaraja, do thou descend unto the
earth. For, O king, if we dwell in this region like unto heaven itself,
we shall forget our sorrows. In that case, O Bharata, thy fame like, unto
a fragrant flower shall vanish from the mobile and the immobile worlds.
By gaining that kingdom of the Kuru chiefs, thou wilt be able to attain
(great glory), and to perform various sacrifices. This that thou art
receiving from Kuvera, thou wilt, O foremost of men, be able to attain
any time. Now, O Bharata, turn thy mind towards the punishment and
destruction of foes that committed wrongs. O king, the wielder of the
thunderbolt himself is incapable of standing thy prowess. And intent upon
thy welfare, he, having Suparna for his mark (Krishna), and also the
grandson of Sini (Satyaki) never experience pain, even when engaged in
encounter with the gods, O Dharmaraja. And Arjuna is peerless in
strength, and so am I too, O best of kings. And as Krishna together with
the Yadavas is intent upon thy welfare, so am I also, O foremost of
monarchs, and the heroic twins accomplished in war. And encountering the
enemy, we, having for our main object the attainment by thee of wealth
and prosperity, will destroy them.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Then having learnt that intention of theirs, the
magnanimous and excellent son of Dharma, versed in religion and profit,
and of immeasurable prowess, went round Vaisravana's abode. And
Yudhishthira the just, after bidding adieu unto the palaces, the rivers,
the lakes, and all the Rakshasas, looked towards the way by which (he)
had come (there). And then looking at the mountain also, the high-souled
and pure-minded one besought that best of mountains, saying, 'O foremost
of mountains, may I together with my friends, after having finished my
task, and slain my foes, and regained my kingdom, see thee again,
carrying on austerities with subdued soul.' And this also he determined
on. And in company with his younger brothers and the Brahmanas, the lord
of the Kurus proceeded even along that very road. And Ghatotkacha with
his followers began to carry them over the mountain cascades. And as they
started, the great sage Lomasa, advising them even as a father doth his
son, with a cheerful heart, went unto the sacred abode of the dwellers of
heaven. Then advised also by Arshtishena, those first of men, the
Parthas, went alone beholding romantic tirthas and hermitages, and other
mighty lakes."
