
SECTION IV
(Pauloma Parva)
'UGRASRAVA SAUTI, the son of Lomaharshana, versed in the Puranas, while
present in the forest of Naimisha, at the twelve years' sacrifice of
Saunaka, surnamed Kulapati, stood before the Rishis in attendance. Having
studied Puranas with meticulous devotion and thus being thoroughly
acquainted with them, he addressed them with joined hands thus, 'I have
graphically described to you the history of Utanka which is one of the
causes of King Janamejaya's Snake-sacrifice. What, revered Sirs, do ye
wish to hear now? What shall I relate to you?' The holy men replied, 'O
son of Lomaharshana, we shall ask thee about what we are anxious to hear
and thou wilt recount the tales one by one. Saunaka, our revered master,
is at present attending the apartment of the holy fire. He is acquainted
with those divine stories which relate to the gods and asuras. He
adequately knoweth the histories of men, serpents, and Gandharvas.
Further, O Sauti, in this sacrifice that learned Brahmana is the chief.
He is able, faithful to his vows, wise, a master of the Sastras and the
Aranyaka, a speaker of truth, a lover of peace, a mortifier of the flesh,
and an observer of the penances according to the authoritative decrees.
He is respected by us all. It behoveth us therefore to wait for him. And
when he is seated on his highly respected seat, thou wilt answer what
that best of Dwijas shall ask of thee.'
"Sauti said, 'Be it so. And when the high-souled master hath been seated
I shall narrate, questioned by him, sacred stories on a variety of
subjects." After a while that excellent Brahmana (Saunaka) having duly
finished all his duties, and having propitiated the gods with prayers and
the manes with oblations of water, came back to the place of sacrifice,
where with Sauti seated before was the assembly of saints of rigid vows
sitting at ease. And when Saunaka was seated in the midst of the Ritwiks
and Sadhyas, who were also in their seats, he spake as followeth."
