SECTION CCV
"Markandeya said, 'There was, O Bharata, a virtuous ascetic of the name
of Kausika and endued with wealth of asceticism and devoted to the study
of the Vedas, he was a very superior Brahmana and that best of Brahmanas
studied all the Vedas with the Angas and the Upanishadas and one day he
was reciting the Vedas at the foot of a tree and at that time there sat
on the top of that tree a female crane and that she-crane happened at
that time to befoul the Brahmana's body and beholding that crane the
Brahmana became very angry and thought of doing her an injury and as the
Brahmana cast his angry glances upon the crane and thought also of doing
her an injury, she fell down on the ground and beholding the crane thus
fallen from the tree and insensible in death, the Brahmana was much moved
by pity and the regenerate one began to lament for the dead crane saying,
'Alas, I have done a bad deed, urged by anger and malice!'
"Markandeya continued, 'Having repeated these words many times, that
learned Brahmana entered a village for procuring alms. And, O bull of the
Bharata race, in course of his eleemosynary round among the houses of
persons of good lineage, the Brahmana entered one such house that he knew
from before. And as he entered the house, he said, 'Give'. And he was
answered by a female with the word, 'Stay'. And while the housewife was
engaged, O king, in cleaning the vessel from which alms are given, her
husband, O thou best of the Bharatas, suddenly entered the house, very
much afflicted with hunger. The chaste housewife beheld her husband and
disregarding the Brahmana, gave her lord water to wash his feet and face
and also a seat and after that the black-eyed lady, placing before her
lord savoury food and drink, humbly stood beside him desirous of
attending to all his wants. And, O Yudhishthira, that obedient wife used
every day to eat the orts of her husband's plate and, always conducting
herself in obedience to the wishes of the lord, that lady ever regarded
her husband, and all her heart's affections inclined towards her lord. Of
various and holy behaviour and skilful in all domestic duties and
attentive to all her relatives, she always did what was agreeable and
beneficial to her husband and she also, with rapt senses attended to the
worship of the gods and the wants of guests and servants and her
mother-in-law and father-in-law.
"And while the lady of handsome eyes was still engaged in waiting upon
her lord, she beheld that Brahmana waiting for alms and beholding him,
she remembered that she had asked him to wait. And remembering all this,
she felt abashed. And then that chaste woman possessed of great fame,
took something for alms and went out, O thou foremost of the Bharatas,
for giving it unto that Brahmana. And when she came before him, the
Brahmana said, 'O best of women, O blessed one, I am surprised at thy
conduct! Having requested me to wait saying, 'Stay' thou didst not
dismiss me!'
"Markandeya continued, 'O lord of men beholding that Brahmana filled with
wrath and blazing with his energy, that chaste woman began to conciliate
him and said, 'O learned one, it behoveth thee to forgive me. My husband
is my supreme god. He came hungry and tired and was being served and
waited upon by me.' Hearing this, the Brahmana said, 'With thee Brahmanas
are not worthy of superior regard. Exaltest thou thy husband above them?
Leading a domestic life, dost thou disregard Brahmanas? Indra himself
boweth down unto them, what shall I say of men on earth. Proud woman,
dost thou not know it, hast thou never heard it, that the Brahmanas are
like fire and may consume the entire earth?' At these words of that
Brahmana the woman answered, 'I am no she-crane, O regenerate Rishi! O
thou that art endued with the wealth of asceticism, cast off this anger
of thine. Engaged as thou are, what canst thou do to me with these angry
glances of thine? I do not disregard Brahmanas. Endued with great energy
of soul, they are like unto the gods themselves. But, O sinless one, this
fault of mine it behoveth thee to forgive. I know the energy and high
dignity of Brahmanas that are possessed of wisdom. The waters of the
ocean have been made brackish and undrinkable by the wrath of the
Brahmanas. I know also the energy of Munis of souls under complete
control and endued with blazing ascetic merit. The fire of their wrath to
this day hath not been extinguished in the forest of Dandaka. It was for
his having disregarded the Brahmanas that the great Asura--the wicked and
evil-minded Vatapi was digested when he came in contact with Agastya. It
hath been heard by us that the powers and merits of high-souled Brahmanas
are great. But, O Brahmana, as regenerate ones of high souls are great in
wrath, so are they equally great in forgiveness. Therefore, O sinless
one, it behoveth thee to forgive me in the matter of this my offence. O
Brahmana, my heart inclineth to that merit which springeth from the
service of my husband, for I regard my husband as the highest among all
the gods. O best of Brahmanas, I practise that virtue which consists in
serving my husband whom I regard as the highest Deity. Behold, O
regenerate one, the merit that attaches to the service of one's husband!
I know that thou hast burnt a she-crane with thy wrath! But, O best of
regenerate ones, the anger that a person cherishes is the greatest of
foes which that person hath. The gods know him for a Brahmana who hath
cast off anger and passion. The gods know him for a Brahmana who always
speaketh the truth here, who always gratifieth his preceptor, and who,
though injured himself, never returneth the injury. The gods know him for
a Brahmana who hath his senses under control, who is virtuous and pure
and devoted to the study of the Vedas, and who hath mastery over anger
and lust. The gods know him for a Brahmana who, cognisant of morals and
endued with mental energy, is catholic in religion and looketh upon all
equal unto himself. The gods know him for a Brahmana who studieth himself
and teacheth others, who performeth sacrifices himself and officiateth at
the sacrifices of others, and who giveth away to the best of his means.
The gods know that bull among the regenerate ones for a Brahmana who,
endued with liberality of soul, practiseth the Brahmacharya vow and is
devoted to study,--in fact who is vigilantly devoted to the study of the
Vedas. Whatever conduceth to the happiness of the Brahmanas is always
recited before these. Ever taking pleasure in truth, the hearts of such
men never find joy in untruth. O thou best of regenerate ones, it hath
been said that the study of the Vedas, tranquillity of soul, simplicity
of behaviour, and repression of the senses, constitute the eternal duties
of the Brahmana. Those cognisant with virtue and morals have said that
truth and honesty are the highest virtue. Virtue that is eternal is
difficult of being understood. But whatever it is, it is based on truth.
The ancients have declared that virtue dependeth on sruti. But, O
foremost of regenerate ones, virtue as exposed in sruti appears to be of
various kinds. It is, therefore, too subtle of comprehension. Thou, O
holy one, art cognisant of virtue, pure, and devoted to the study of the
Vedas. I think, however, O holy one, that thou dost not know what virtue
in reality is. Repairing to the city of Mithila, enquire thou of a
virtuous fowler there, if indeed, O regenerate one, thou art not really
acquainted with what constitutes the highest virtue. There liveth in
Mithila a fowler who is truthful and devoted to the service of his
parents and who hath senses under complete control. Even he will
discourse to thee on virtue. Blessed be thou, O best of regenerate ones,
if thou likest, repair thither. O faultless one, it behoveth thee to
forgive me, if what I have said be unpalatable, for they that are
desirous of acquiring virtue are incapable of injuring women!'
"At these words of the chaste woman, the Brahmana replied, saying, 'I am
gratified with thee. Blessed be thou; my anger hath subsided, O beautiful
one! The reproofs uttered by thee will be of the highest advantage to me.
Blessed be thou, I shall now go and accomplish what is so conducive, O
handsome one, to my benefit!'
"Markandeya continued, 'Dismissed by her, Kausika, that best of
regenerate ones, left her house, and, reproaching himself, returned to
his own abode.'"
