SECTION CCXXIII
"The lady replied, 'I am a daughter of Prajapati (the lord of all
creatures, Brahma) and my name is Devasena. My sister Daityasena has ere
this been ravished by Kesin. We two sisters with our maids habitually
used to come to these Manasa mountains for pleasures with the permission
of Prajapati. And the great Asura Kesin used daily to pay his court to
us. Daityasena, O conqueror of Paka, listened to him, but I did not.
Daityasena was, therefore, taken away by him, but, O illustrious one,
thou hast rescued me with thy might. And now, O lord of the celestials, I
desire that thou shouldst select an invincible husband for me.' To this
Indra replied, 'Thou art a cousin of mine, thy mother being a sister of
my mother Dakshayani, and now I desire to hear thee relate thine own
prowess.' The lady replied, 'O hero with long arms, I am Avala[70] (weak)
but my husband must be powerful. And by the potency of my father's boon,
he will be respected by gods and Asuras alike.' Indra said, 'O blameless
creature, I wish to hear from thee, what sort of power thou wishest thy
husband to possess.' The lady replied, 'That manly and famous and
powerful being devoted to Brahma, who is able to conquer all the
celestials, Asuras, Yakshas, Kinnaras, Uragas, Rakshasas, and the
evil-minded Daityas and to subdue all the worlds with thee, shall be my
husband.'
"Markandeya continued, 'On hearing her speech, Indra was grieved and
deeply thought within himself, 'There is no husband for this lady,
answering to her own description.' And that god adorned with sun-like
effulgence, then perceived the Sun rising on the Udaya hill,[71] and the
great Soma (Moon) gliding into the Sun. It being the time of the new
Moon, he of a hundred sacrifices, at the Raudra[72] moment, observed the
gods and Asuras fighting on the Sunrise hill. And he saw that the morning
twilight was tinged with red clouds. And he also saw that the abode of
Varuna had become blood-red. And he also observed Agni conveying
oblations offered with various hymns by Bhrigu, Angiras, and others and
entering the disc of the Sun. And he further saw the twenty four Parvas
adorning the Sun, and the terrible Soma also present in the Sun under
such surroundings. And observing this union of the Sun and the Moon and
that fearful conjunction of theirs, Sakra thought within himself, This
terrific conjunction of the Sun and the Moon forebodeth a fearful battle
on the morrow. And the river Sindhu (Indus) too is flowing with a current
of fresh blood and the jackals with fiery laces are crying to the Sun.
This great conjunction is fearful and full of energy. This union of the
Moon (Soma) with the Sun and Agni is very wonderful. And if Soma giveth
birth to a son now, that son may become the husband of this lady. And
Agni also hath similar surroundings now, and he too is a god. If the two
begetteth a son, that son, may become the husband of this lady.' With
these thoughts that illustrious celestial repaired to the regions of
Brahma, taking Devasena[73] with him. And saluting the Grandsire he said
unto him, 'Do thou fix a renowned warrior as husband of this lady.'
Brahma replied, 'O slayer of Asuras, it shall be; as thou hast intended.
The issue of that union will be mighty and powerful accordingly. That
powerful being will be the husband of this lady and the joint leader of
thy forces with thee.' Thus addressed, the lord of the celestials and the
lady bowed unto him and then repaired to the place where those great
Brahmanas, the powerful celestial Rishis, Vasistha and others, lived. And
with Indra at their head, the other gods also, desirous of drinking the
Soma beverage, repaired to the sacrifices of those Rishis to receive
their respective shares of the offerings. Having duly performed the
ceremonies with the bright blazing fire, those great-minded persons
offered oblations to the celestials. And the Adbhuta fire, that carrier
of oblations, was invited with mantras. And coming out of the solar disc,
that lordly fire duly repaired thither, restraining speech. And, O chief
of Bharata's race, that fire entering the sacrificial fire that had been
ignited and into which various offerings were made by the Rishis with
recitations of hymns, took them with him and made them over to the
dwellers of heaven. And while returning from that place, he observed the
wives of those high-souled Rishis sleeping at their ease on their beds.
And those ladies had a complexion beautiful like that of an altar of
gold, spotless like moon-beams, resembling fiery flames and looking like
blazing stars. And seeing those wives of the illustrious Brahmanas with
eager eyes, his mind became agitated and he was smitten with their
charms. Restraining his heart he considered it improper for him to be
thus agitated. And he said unto himself, The wives of these great
Brahmanas are chaste and faithful and beyond the reach of other people's
desires. I am filled with desire to possess them. I cannot lawfully cast
my eyes upon them, nor ever touch them when they are not filled with
desire. I shall, therefore, gratify myself daily with only looking at
them by becoming their Garhapatya (house-hold) fire.'
"Markandeya continued, The Adbhuta fire, thus transforming himself into a
house-hold one, was highly gratified with seeing those gold-complexioned
ladies and touching them with his flames. And influenced by their charms
he dwelt there for a long time, giving them his heart and filled with an
intense love for them. And baffled in all his efforts to win the hearts
of those Brahmana ladies, and his own heart tortured by love, he repaired
to a forest with the certain object of destroying himself. A little while
before, Swaha, the daughter of Daksha, had bestowed her love on him. The
excellent lady had been endeavouring for a long time to detect his weak
moments; but that blameless lady did not succeed in finding out any
weakness in the calm and collected fire-god. But now that the god had
betaken himself to a forest, actually tortured by the pangs of love, she
thought, 'As I too am distressed with love, I shall assume the guise of
the wives of the seven Rishis, and in that disguise I shall seek the
fire-god so smitten with their charms. This done, he will be gratified
and my desire too will be satisfied.'"
