SECTION CCXIV
"Markandeya continued, 'The virtuous fowler, having introduced his (both)
parents to that Brahmana as his highest gurus, again spoke to him as
follows, 'Mark thou the power of this virtue of mine, by which my inner
spiritual vision is extended. For this, thou wast told by that
self-restrained, truthful lady, devoted to her husband, 'Hie thee to
Mithila; for there lives a fowler who will explain to thee, the mysteries
of religion.' The Brahmana said, 'O pious man, so constant in fulfilling
thy religious obligations, bethinking myself of what that truthful
good-natured lady so true to her husband, hath said, I am convinced that
thou art really endowed with every high quality.' The fowler replied, 'I
have no doubt, my lord, that what that lady, so faithful to her husband,
said to thee about me, was said with full knowledge of the facts. I have,
O Brahmana, explained to thee all this as a matter of favour. And now,
good sir, listen to me. I shall explain what is good for thee. O good
Brahmana, of irreproachable character, thou hast wronged thy father and
thy mother, for thou hast left home without their permission, for the
purpose of learning the Vedas. Thou hast not acted properly in this
matter, for thy ascetic and aged parents have become entirely blind from
grief at thy loss. Do thou return home to console them. May this virtue
never forsake thee Thou art high-minded, of ascetic merit, and always
devoted to thy religion but all these have become useless to thee. Do
thou without delay return to console thy parents. Do have some regard for
my words and not act otherwise; I tell thee what is good for thee, O
Brahmana Rishi, Do thou return home this very day.' The Brahmana replied,
'This that thou hast said, is undoubtedly true; mayst thou, O pious man,
attain prosperity; I am much pleased with thee.' The fowler said, 'O
Brahmana, as thou practisest with assiduousness those divine, ancient,
and eternal virtues which are so difficult of attainment even by
pure-minded persons, thou appearest (to me) like a divine being. Return
to the side of thy father and mother and be quick and diligent in
honouring thy parents; for, I do not know if there is any virtue higher
than this.' The Brahmana replied, 'By a piece of singular good luck have
I arrived here, and by a piece of similar good luck have I thus been
associated with thee. It is very difficult to find out, in our midst, a
person who can so well expound the mysteries of religion; there is
scarcely one man among thousands, who is well versed in the science of
religion. I am very glad, O great man, to have secured thy friendship;
mayst thou be prosperous. I was on the point of falling into hell, but
was extricated by thee. It was destined to be so, for thou didst
(unexpectedly) come in my way. And, O great man, as the fallen King
Yayati was saved by his virtuous grandsons (daughter's sons), so, have I
know been saved by thee. According to thy advice, I shall honour my
father and my mother; for a man with an impure heart can never expound
the mysteries of sin and righteousness. As it is very difficult for a
person born in the Sudra class to learn the mysteries of the eternal
religion, I do not consider thee to be a Sudra. There must surely be some
mystery in connection with this matter. Thou must have attained the
Sudra's estate by reason of the fruition of thine own past karma. O
magnanimous man, I long to know the truth about this matter. Do thou tell
it to me with attention and according to thy own inclination.'
"The fowler replied, 'O good Brahmana, Brahmanas are worthy of all
respect from me. Listen, O sinless one, to this story of a previous
existence of mine. O son of an excellent Brahmana, I was formerly a
Brahmana, well-read in the Vedas, and an accomplished student of the
Vedangas. Through my own fault I have been degraded to my present state.
A certain king, accomplished in the science of dhanurveda (science of
archery), was my friend; and from his companionship, O Brahmana, I, too
became skilled in archery; and one day the king, in company with his
ministers and followed by his best warriors, went out on a hunting
expedition. He killed a large number of deer near a hermitage. I, too, O
good Brahmana, discharged a terrible arrow. And a rishi was wounded by
that arrow with its head bent out. He fell down upon the ground, and
screaming loudly said, 'I have harmed no one, what sinful man has done
this?' And, my lord, taking him for a deer, I went up to him and found
that he was pierced through the body by my arrow. On account of my wicked
deed I was sorely grieved (in mind). And then I said to that rishi of
severe ascetic merit, who was loudly crying, lying upon the ground, 'I
have done this unwittingly, O rishi.' And also this I said to the muni:
'Do thou think it proper to pardon all this transgression.' But, O
Brahmana, the rishi, lashing himself into a fury, said to me, 'Thou shalt
be born as a cruel fowler in the Sudra class."
