SECTION CCXXXII
"Draupadi said, 'I shall now indicate to thee, for attracting the heart
of thy husbands a way that is free from deceit. By adopting it duly, dear
friend, thou will be able to draw away thy lord from other females. In
all the worlds, including that of the celestials, there is no god equal,
O Satyabhama, unto the husband. When he is gratified with thee, thou
mayst have (from thy husband) every object of desire; when he is angry,
all these may be lost. It is from her husband that the wife obtaineth
offspring and various articles of enjoyment. It is from thy husband that
thou mayst have handsome beds and seats, and robes and garlands, and
perfumes, and great fame and heaven itself hereafter. One cannot obtain
happiness here by means that are easy. Indeed, the woman that is chaste,
obtains weal with woe. Always adore Krishna, therefore, with friendship
and love physical sufferings. And do thou also act in a way, by offering
handsome seats and excellent garlands and various perfumes and prompt
service, that he may be devoted to thee, thinking, 'I am truly loved by
her!' Hearing the voice of thy lord at the gate, rise thou up from thy
seat and stay in readiness within the room. And as soon as thou seest him
enter thy chamber, worship him by promptly offering him a seat and water
to wash his feet. And even when he commands a maidservant to do anything,
get thou up and do it thyself. Let Krishna understand this temper of thy
mind and know that thou adorest him with all thy heart. And, O
Satyabhama, whatever thy lord speaketh before thee, do not blab of it
even if it may not deserve concealment,--for if any of thy co-wives were
to speak of it unto Vasudeva, he might be irritated with thee. Feed thou
by every means in thy power those that are dear and devoted to thy lord
and always seek his good. Thou shouldst, however, always keep thyself
aloof from those that are hostile to and against thy lord and seek to do
him injury, as also from those that are addicted to deceit. Foregoing all
excitement and carelessness in the presence of men, conceal thy
inclinations by observing silence, and thou shouldst not stay or converse
in private even with thy sons, Pradyumna and Samva. Thou shouldst form
attachments with only such females as are high-born and sinless and
devoted to their lords, and thou shouldst always shun women that are
wrathful, addicted to drinks, gluttonous, thievish, wicked and fickle.
Behaviour such as this is reputable and productive of prosperity; and
while it is capable of neutralising hostility, it also leadeth to heaven.
Therefore, worship thou thy husband, decking thyself in costly garlands
and ornaments and smearing thyself with unguents and excellent perfumes."
