SECTION CCXXX
Markandeya continued, "When Skanda had bestowed these powers, Swaha
appeared to him and said, 'Thou art my natural son,--I desire that thou
shalt grant exquisite happiness to me."
"Skanda replied, 'What sort of happiness dost thou wish to enjoy?'"
"Swaha replied, 'O mighty being, I am the favourite daughter of Daksha,
by name Swaha; and from my youthful days I have been in love with
Hutasana (the Fire-god); but that god, my son, does not understand my
feelings. I desire to live for ever with him (as his wife).'"
"Skanda replied, 'From this day, lady, all the oblations that men of
virtuous character, who swerve not from the path of virtue, will offer to
their gods or ancestors with incantation of purifying hymns by Brahmanas,
shall always be offered (through Agni) coupled with the name of Swaha,
and thus, excellent lady, wilt thou always live associated with Agni, the
god of fire.'"
"Markandeya continued, Thus addressed and honoured by Skanda, Swaha was
greatly pleased; and associated with her husband Pavaka (the Fire-god),
she honoured him in return.'"
"Then Brahma, the lord of all creatures, said to Mahasena, 'Do thou go
and visit thy father Mahadeva, the conqueror of Tripura. Rudra coalescing
with Agni (the Fire-god) and Uma with Swaha have combined to make thee
invincible for the well-being of all creatures. And the semen of the
high-souled Rudra cast into the reproductive organ of Uma was thrown back
upon this hill, and hence the twin Mujika and Minjika came into being. A
portion of it fell into the Blood Sea, another portion, into the rays of
the sun, another upon the earth and thus was it distributed in five
portions. Learned men ought to remember that these thy various and
fierce-looking followers living on the flesh of animals were produced
from the semen'. 'Be it so,' so saying, the high-souled Mahasena with
fatherly love, honoured his father Maheswara."
"Markandeya continued, 'Men who are desirous of acquiring wealth, should
worship those five classes of spirits with the sun flower, and for
alleviation of diseases also worship must be rendered to them. The twin
Mujika and Minjika begotten by Rudra must always be respected by persons
desiring the welfare of little children; and persons who desire to have
children born to them must always worship those female spirits who live
on human flesh and are produced in trees. Thus all Pisachas are said to
be divided into innumerable classes. And now, O king, listen to the
origin of the bells and standards of Skanda. Airavata (Indra's elephant)
is known to have had two bells of the name of Vaijayanti, and the
keen-witted Sakra had them brought to him, and personally gave them to
Guha. Visakha took one of those bells and Skanda the other. The standards
of both Kartikeya and Visakha were of a red colour. That mighty god
Mahasena was pleased with the toys that had been given to him by the
gods. Surrounded by hosts of gods and Pisachas and seated on the Golden
Mountain, he looked splendid in all the grandeur of prosperity. And that
mountain covered with fine forests, also looked grand in his
companionship, just as the Mandara hill abounding with excellent caves
shines with the rays of the sun. The White Mountain was adorned with
whole tracts of wood-land covered with blossoming Santanaka flowers and
with forests of Karavira, Parijata, Jana and Asoke trees,--as also with
wild tracts overgrown with Kadamva trees; and it abounded with herds of
celestial deer and flocks of celestial birds. And the rumbling of clouds
serving the purpose of musical instruments sounded like the murmur of an
agitated sea, and celestial Gandharvas and Apsaras began to dance. And
there arose a great sound of joy from the merriment of all creatures.
Thus the whole world with Indra himself seemed to have been transferred
to the White Mountain. And all the people began to observe Skanda with
satisfaction in their looks, and they did not at all feel tired of doing
so."
Markandeya continued, "When that adorable son of the Fire-god was
anointed as leader of the celestial army, that grand and happy lord, Hara
(Mahadeva) riding with Parvati in a chariot shining with sunlike
refulgence repaired to a place called Bhadravata. His excellent chariot
was drawn by a thousand lions and managed by Kala. They passed through
blank space, and seemed as if they were about to devour the sky; and
striking terror into the heart of all creatures in the mobile divisions
of the worlds, those maned beasts flitted through the air, uttering
fearful growls. And that lord of all animals (Mahadeva) seated in that
chariot with Uma, looked like the sun with flames of lightning
illuminating masses of clouds begirt with Indra's bow (rainbow). He was
preceded by that adorable Lord of riches riding on the backs of human
beings with his attendant Guhyakas riding in his beautiful car Pushpaka.
And Sakra too riding on his elephant Airavata and accompanied by other
gods brought up the rear of Mahadeva, the granter of boons, marching in
this way at the head of the celestial army. And the great Yaksha Amogha
with his attendants--the Jambhaka Yakshas and other Rakshasas decorated
with garlands of flowers--obtained a place in the right wing of his army;
and many gods of wonderful fighting powers in company with the Vasus and
the Rudras, also marched with the right division of his army. And the
terrible-looking Yama too in company with Death marched with him.
(followed by hundreds of terrible diseases); and behind him was carried
the terrible, sharp-pointed, well-decorated trident of Siva, called
Vijaya. And Varuna, the adorable lord of waters with his terrible
Pasa,[80] and surrounded by numerous aquatic animals, marched slowly with
the trident. And the trident Vijaya was followed by the Pattisa[81] of
Rudra guarded by maces, balls, clubs and other excellent weapons. And the
Pattisa, O king, was followed by the bright umbrella of Rudra and the
Kamandalu served by the Maharshis; and on it progressed in the company of
Bhrigu, Angiras and others. And behind all these rode Rudra in his white
chariot, re-assuring the gods with the exhibition of his powers. And
rivers and lakes and seas, Apsaras, Rishis, Celestials, Gandharvas and
serpents, stars, planets, and the children of gods, as also many women,
followed him in his train. These handsome-looking ladies proceeded
scattering flowers all around; and the clouds marched, having made their
obeisance to that god (Mahadeva) armed with the Pinaka bow. And some of
them held a white umbrella over his head, and Agni (the Fire god) and
Vayu (the god of winds) busied themselves with two hairy fans (emblems of
royalty). And, O king, he was followed by the glorious Indra accompanied
by the Rajarshis, and singing the praise of that god with the emblem of
the bull. And Gauri, Vidya, Gandhari, Kesini, and the lady called Mitra
in company with Savitri, all proceeded in the train of Parvati, as also
all the Vidyas (presiding deities of all branches of knowledge) that were
created by the learned. The Rakshasa spirit who delivers to different
battalions the commands which are implicitly obeyed by Indra and other
gods, advanced in front of the army as standard-bearer. And that foremost
of Rakshasas, by name Pingala, the friend of Rudra, who is always busy in
places where corpses are burnt, and who is agreeable to all people,
marched with them merrily, at one time going ahead of the army, and
falling behind again at another, his movements being uncertain. Virtuous
actions are the offerings with which the god Rudra is worshipped by
mortals. He who is also called Siva, the omnipotent god, armed with the
Pinaka bow, is Maheswara. He is worshipped in various forms.
"The son of Krittika, the leader of the celestial army, respectful to
Brahmanas, surrounded by the celestial forces, also followed that lord of
the gods. And then Mahadeva said these weighty words to Mahasena, 'Do
thou carefully command the seventh army corps of the celestial forces.'
"Skanda replied, 'Very well, my lord! I shall command the seventh army
corps. Now tell me quickly if there is anything else to be done.'
"Rudra said, 'Thou shall always find me in the field of action. By
looking up to me and by devotion to me shalt thou attain great welfare.'
"Markandeya continued, 'With these words Maheswara received him in his
embrace, and then dismissed him. And, O great king, after the dismissal
of Skanda, prodigies of various kinds occurred to disturb the equanimity
of the gods.'
"The firmament with the stars was in a blaze, and the whole universe in a
state of utter confusion. The earth quaked and gave forth a rumbling
sound, and darkness overspread the whole world. Then observing this
terrible catastrophe, Sankara with the estimable Uma, and the celestials
with the great Maharshis, were much exercised in mind. And when they had
fallen into this state of confusion, there appeared before them a fierce
and mighty host armed with various weapons, and looking like a mass of
clouds and rocks. Those terrible and countless beings, speaking different
languages directed their movements towards the point where Sankara and
the celestials stood. They hurled into the ranks of the celestial army
flights of arrows in all directions, masses of rock, maces, sataghnis,
prasas and parighas. The celestial army was thrown into a state of
confusion by a shower of these terrible weapons and their ranks were seen
to waver. The Danavas made a great havoc by cutting up their soldiers,
horses, elephants, chariots and arms. And the celestial troops then
seemed as if they were about to turn their backs upon the enemy. And
numbers of them fell, slain by the Asuras, like large trees in a forest
burnt in a conflagration. Those dwellers of heaven fell with their heads,
separated from their bodies, and having none to lead them in that fearful
battle, they were slaughtered by the enemy. And then the god Purandara
(Indra), the slayer of Vala, observing that they were unsteady and
hard-pressed by the Asuras, tried to rally them with this speech, 'Do not
be afraid, ye heroes, may success attend your efforts! Do ye all take up
your arms, and resolve upon manly conduct, and ye will meet with no more
misfortune, and defeat those wicked and terrible-looking Danavas. May ye
be successful! Do ye fall upon the Danavas with me.'
"The dwellers of heaven were re-assured on hearing this speech from
Sakra; and under his leadership, they again rushed against the Danavas.
And then the thirty-three crores of gods and all the powerful Marutas and
the Sadhyas with the Vasus returned to the charge. And the arrows which
they angrily discharged against the enemy drew a large quantity of blood
from the bodies of the Daityas and of their horses and elephants. And
those sharp arrows passing through their bodies fell upon the ground,
looking like so many snakes falling from the sides of a hill. And, O
king, the Daityas pierced by those arrows fell fast on all sides, looking
like so many detached masses of clouds. Then the Danava host, struck with
panic at that charge of the celestials on the field of battle, wavered at
that shower of various weapons. Then all the gods loudly gave vent to
their joy, with arms ready to strike; and the celestial bands too struck
up various airs. Thus took place that encounter, so fearful to both
sides: for all the battle-field was covered with blood and strewn with
the bodies of both gods and Asuras. But the gods were soon worsted all on
a sudden, and the terrible Danavas again made a great havoc of the
celestial army. Then the Asuras, drums struck up and their shrill bugles
were sounded; and the Danava chiefs yelled their terrific war-cry.
"Then a powerful Danava, taking a huge mass of rock in his hands, came
out of that terrible Daitya army. He looked like the sun peering forth
from against a mass of dark clouds. And, O king, the celestials,
beholding that he was about to hurl that mass of rock at them, fled in
confusion. But they were pursued by Mahisha, who hurled that hillock at
them. And, O lord of the world, by the falling of that mass of rock, ten
thousand warriors of the celestial army were crushed to the ground and
breathed their last. And this act of Mahisha struck terror into the
hearts of the gods, and with his attendant Danavas he fell upon them like
a lion attacking a herd of deer. And when Indra and the other celestials
observed that Mahisha was advancing to the charge, they fled, leaving
behind their arms and colours. And Mahisha was greatly enraged at this,
and he quickly advanced towards the chariot of Rudra; and reaching near,
he seized its pole with his hands. And when Mahisha in a fit of rage had
thus seized the chariot of Rudra, all the Earth began to groan and the
great Rishis lost their senses. And Daityas of huge proportions, looking
like dark clouds, were boisterous with joy, thinking that victory was
assured to them. And although that adorable god (Rudra) was in that
plight, yet he did not think it worth while to kill Mahisha in battle; he
remembered that Skanda would deal the deathblow to that evil-minded
Asura. And the fiery Mahisha, contemplating with satisfaction the prize
(the chariot of Rudra) which he had secured, sounded his war-cry, to the
great alarm of the gods and the joy of the Daityas. And when the gods
were in that fearful predicament, the mighty Mahasena, burning with
anger, and looking grand like the Sun advanced to their rescue. And that
lordly being was clad in blazing red and decked with a wreath of red
flowers. And cased in armour of gold he rode in a gold-coloured chariot
bright as the Sun and drawn by chestnut horses. And at his sight the army
of the daityas was suddenly dispirited on the field of battle. And, O
great king, the mighty Mahasena discharged a bright Sakti for the
destruction of Mahisha. That missile cut off the head of Mahisha, and he
fell upon the ground and died. And his head massive as a hillock, falling
on the ground, barred the entrance to the country of the Northern Kurus,
extending in length for sixteen Yojanas though at present the people of
that country pass easily by that gate.
"It was observed both by the gods and the Danavas that Skanda hurled his
sakti again and again on the field of battle, and that it returned to his
hands, after killing thousands of the enemy's forces. And the terrible
Danavas fell in large numbers by the arrows of the wise Mahasena. And
then a panic seized them, and the followers of Skanda began to slay and
eat them up by thousands and drink their blood. And they joyously
exterminated the Danavas in no time, just as the sun destroys darkness,
or as fire destroys a forest, or as the winds drive away the clouds. And
in this manner the famous Skanda defeated all his enemies. And the gods
came to congratulate him, and he, in turn, paid his respects to
Maheswara. And that son of Krittika looked grand like the sun in all the
glory of his effulgence. And when the enemy was completely defeated by
Skanda and when Maheswara left the battle-field, Purandara embraced
Mahasena and said to him, 'This Mahisha, who was made invincible by the
favour of Brahma hath been killed by thee. O best of warriors, the gods
were like grass to him. O strong-limbed hero, thou hast removed a thorn
of the celestials. Thou hast killed in battle hundreds of Danavas equal
in valour to Mahisha who were all hostile to us, and who used to harass
us before. And thy followers too have devoured them by hundreds. Thou
art, O mighty being, invincible in battle like Uma's lord; and this
victory shall be celebrated as thy first achievement, and thy fame shall
be undying in the three worlds. And, O strong-armed god, all the gods
will yield their allegiance to thee.' Having spoken thus to Mahasena, the
husband of Sachi left the place accompanied by the gods and with the
permission of the adorable three-eyed god (Siva). And Rudra returned to
Bhadravata, and the celestials too returned to their respective abodes.
And Rudra spoke, addressing the gods, 'Ye must render allegiance to
Skanda just as ye do unto me.' And that son of the Fire-god, having
killed the Danavas hath conquered the three worlds, in one day, and he
hath been worshipped by the great Rishis. The Brahmana who with due
attention readeth this story of the birth of Skanda, attaineth to great
prosperity in this world and the companionship of Skanda hereafter."
Yudhishthira said, "O good and adorable Brahmana, I wish to know the
different names of that high-souled being, by which he is celebrated
throughout the three worlds."
Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by the Pandava in that assembly
of Rishis, the worshipful Markandeya of high ascetic merit replied,
'Agneya (Son of Agni), Skanda (Cast-off), Diptakirti (Of blazing fame),
Anamaya (Always hale), Mayuraketu (Peacock-bannered), Dharmatman (The
virtuous-souled), Bhutesa (The lord of all creatures), Mahishardana (The
slayer of Mahisha), Kamajit (The subjugator of desires), Kamada (The
fulfiller of desires), Kanta (The handsome), Satyavak (The truthful in
speech), Bhuvaneswara (The lord of the universe), Sisu (The child),
Sighra (The quick), Suchi (The pure), Chanda (The fiery), Diptavarna (The
bright-complexioned), Subhanana (Of beautiful face), Amogha (Incapable of
being baffled), Anagha (The sinless), Rudra (The terrible), Priya (The
favourite), Chandranana (Of face like the moon), Dipta-sasti (The wielder
of the blazing lance), Prasantatman (Of tranquil soul), Bhadrakrit (The
doer of good), Kutamahana (The chamber of even the wicked), Shashthipriya
(True favourite of Shashthi), Pavitra (The holy), Matrivatsala (The
reverencer of his mother), Kanya-bhartri (The protector of virgins),
Vibhakta (Diffused over the universe), Swaheya (The son of Swaha),
Revatisuta (The child of Revati), Prabhu (The Lord), Neta (The leader),
Visakha (Reared up by Visakha), Naigameya (Sprang from the Veda),
Suduschara (Difficult of propitiation), Suvrata (Of excellent vows),
Lalita (The beautiful), Valakridanaka-priya (Fond of toys), Khacharin
(The ranger of skies), Brahmacharin (The chaste), Sura (The brave),
Saravanodbhava (Born in a forest of heath), Viswamitra priya (The
favourite of Viswamitra), Devasena-priya (The lover of Devasena),
Vasudeva-priya (The beloved of Vasudeva), and Priya-krit (The doer of
agreeable things)--these are the divine names of Kartikeya. Whoever
repeateth them, undoubtedly secureth fame, wealth, and salvation."
'Markandeya continued, "O valiant scion of Kuru's race, I shall now with
due devotion pray to that unrivalled, mighty, six-faced, and valiant Guha
who is worshipped by gods and Rishis, enumerating his other titles of
distinction: do thou listen to them: Thou art devoted to Brahma, begotten
of Brahma, and versed in the mysteries of Brahma. Thou art called
Brahmasaya, and thou art the foremost of those who are possessed of
Brahma. Thou art fond of Brahma, thou art austere like the Brahmanas and
art versed in the great mystery of Brahma and the leader of the
Brahmanas. Thou art Swaha, thou art Swadha, and thou art the holiest of
the holy, and art invoked in hymns and celebrated as the six-flamed fire.
Thou art the year, thou art the six seasons, thou art the months, the
(lunar) half months, the (solar) declinations, and the cardinal points of
space. Thou art lotus-eyed. Thou art possessed of a lily-like face. Thou
hast a thousand faces and a thousand arms. Thou art the ruler of the
universe, thou art the great Oblation, and thou art the animating spirit
of all the gods and the Asuras. Thou art the great leader of armies. Thou
art Prachanda (furious), thou art the Lord, and thou art the great master
and the conqueror of thine enemies. Thou art, Sahasrabhu (multiform),
Sahasratusti (a thousand times content), Sahasrabhuk (devourer of
everything), and Sahasrapad (of a thousand legs), and thou art the earth
itself. Thou art possessed of infinite forms and thousand heads and great
strength. According to thine own inclinations thou hast appeared as the
son of Ganga, Swaha, Mahi, or Krittika. O six-faced god, thou dost play
with the cock and assume different forms according to thy will. Thou art
Daksha. Soma, the Maruta, Dharma, Vayu, the prince of mountains, and
Indra, for all time. Thou art mighty, the most eternal of all eternal
things, and the lord of all lords. Thou art the progenitor of Truth, the
destroyer of Diti's progeny (Asuras), and the great conqueror of the
enemies of the celestials. Thou art the personation of virtue and being
thyself vast and minute, thou art acquainted with the highest and lowest
points of virtuous acts, and the mysteries of Brahma. O foremost of all
gods and high-souled lord of the Universe, this whole creation is
over-spread with thy energy! I have thus prayed to thee according to the
best of my power. I salute thee who art possessed of twelve eyes and many
hands. Thy remaining attributes transcend my powers of comprehension!'
The Brahmana who with due attention readeth this story of the birth of
Skanda, or relateth it unto Brahmanas, or hears it narrated by regenerate
men, attaineth to wealth, long life, fame, children, as also victory,
prosperity and contentment, and the companionship of Skanda."
