SECTION CCXLI
"Yudhishthira said, 'O child, why dost thou use language such as this,
towards the frightened Kurus, who are now in adversity and who have come
to us, solicitous of protection! O Vrikodara, disunions and disputes do
take place amongst those that are connected in blood. Hostilities such as
these do go on. But the honour of the family is never suffered to be
interfered with. If any stranger seeketh to insult the honour of a
family, they that are good never tolerate such insult coming from the
stranger. The wicked-souled king of the Gandharvas knoweth that we are
living here from some time. Yet disregarding us, he hath done this deed
which is so disagreeable to us! O exalted one, from this forcible seizure
of Duryodhana and from this insult to the ladies of our house by a
stranger, our family honour is being destroyed. Therefore, ye tigers
among men, arise and arm yourselves without delay for rescuing those that
have sought our protection and for guarding the honour of our family. Ye
tigers among men, let Arjuna and the twins and thyself also that art
brave and unvanquished, liberate Duryodhana, who is even now being taken
away a captive! Ye foremost of warriors, these blazing cars, furnished
with golden flagstaff's and every kind of weapons belonging to
Dhritarashtra's sons, are ready here. With Indrasena and other
charioteers skilled in arms, for guiding them, ride ye on these
everfurnished cars of deep rattle! And riding on these, exert ye with
activity for fighting with the Gandharvas to liberate Duryodhana. Even an
ordinary Kashatriya (amongst those that are here), would to the height of
his power, protect one that hath come hither for refuge! What then, O
Vrikodara, shall I say of thee! Entreated for assistance in such words as
'O hasten to my aid!' Who is there (amongst those standing around me)
that is high-souled enough to assist even his foe, beholding him seeking
shelter with joined hands? The bestowal of a boon, sovereignty, and the
birth of a son are sources of great joy. But, ye sons of Pandu, the
liberation of a foe from distress is equal to all the three put together!
What can be a source of greater joy to you than that Duryodhana sunk in
distress seeketh his very life as depending on the might of your arms? O
Vrikodara, if the vow in which I am engaged had been over, there is
little doubt that I would myself have run to his aid. Strive thou by all
means, O Bharata, to liberate Duryodhana by the arts of conciliation. If,
however, the king of the Gandharvas cannot be managed by the arts of
conciliation, then must thou try to rescue Suyodhana by lightly
skirmishing with the foe. But if the chief of the Gandharvas do not let
the Kurus off even then, they must be rescued by crushing the foe by all
means. O Vrikodara, this is all I can tell thee now, for my vow hath been
begun and is not ended yet!"
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Ajatasatru, Dhananjaya
pledged himself, from respect for these commands of his superior, to
liberate the Kauravas. And Arjuna said, 'If the Gandharvas do not set the
Dhartarashtras free peacefully, the Earth shall this day drink the blood
of the king of the Gandharvas!' And hearing that pledge of the
truth-speaking Arjuna, the Kauravas then, O king, regained (the lost)
tenor of their minds."
