SECTION CCXLIII
Vaisampayana said, "Then those Gandharvas decked in golden garlands and
accomplished in celestial weapons, showing their blazing shafts,
encountered the Pandavas from every side. And as the sons of Pandu were
only four in number and the Gandharvas counted by thousands, the battle
that ensued appeared to be extraordinary. And as the cars of Karna and
Duryodhana had formerly been broken into a hundred fragments by the
Gandharvas, so were the cars of the four heroes attempted to be broken.
But those tigers among men began to encounter with their showers of
arrows thousands upon thousands of Gandharvas rushing towards them. Those
rangers of skies endued with great energy, thus checked on all sides by
that arrowy down-pour, succeeded not in even coming near to the sons of
Pandu. Then Arjuna whose ire had been provoked, aiming at the angry
Gandharvas, prepared to hurl against them his celestial weapons. And in
that encounter, the mighty Arjuna, by means of his Agneya weapon, sent
ten hundreds of thousands of Gandharvas to the abode of Yama. And that
mighty bowman, Bhima, also, that foremost of all warriors in battle,
slew, by means of his sharp arrows, Gandharvas by hundreds. And the
mighty sons of Madri also, battling with vigour, encountered hundreds of
Gandharvas, O king, and slaughtered them all. And as Gandharvas were
being thus slaughtered by the mighty warriors with their celestial
weapons, they rose up to the skies, taking with them the sons of
Dhritarashtra. But Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, beholding them rise up
to the skies, surrounded them on every side by a wide net of arrows. And
confined within that arrowy net like birds within a cage, they showered
in wrath upon Arjuna maces and darts and broad-swords. But Arjuna who was
conversant with the most efficacious weapons, soon checked that shower of
maces and darts and broad-swords, and in return began to mangle the limbs
of the Gandharvas with his crescent-shaped arrows. And heads and legs and
arms began to drop down from above resembling a shower of stones. And at
that sight, the foe was struck with panic. And as the Gandharvas were
being slaughtered by the illustrious son of Pandu, they began to shower
from the skies a heavy downpour of shafts upon Arjuna, who was on the
surface of the earth. But that chastiser of foes, Arjuna, endued with
mighty energy checked that shower of arrows by means of his own weapons
and began, in return, to wound them. Then Arjuna of the Kuru race shot
his well-known weapons called Sthunakarna, Indrajala, Saura, Agneya and
Saumya. And the Gandharvas consumed by the fiery weapons of Kunti's son,
began to suffer heavily, like the sons of Diti, while being scorched by
Sakra's thunder-bolt. And when they attacked Arjuna from above, they were
checked by his net of arrows. And while they attacked him from all sides
on the surface of the earth, they were checked by his crescent-shaped
arrows. And beholding the Gandharvas put in fear by Kunti's son,
Chitrasena rushed, O Bharata, at Dhananjaya, armed with a mace. And as
the king of the Gandharvas was rushing at Arjuna from above with that
mace in hand, the latter cut with his arrows that mace wholly made of
iron into seven pieces. And beholding that mace of his cut into many
pieces by Arjuna of great activity, with his arrows, Chitrasena, by means
of his science, concealed himself from the view of the Pandava and began
to fight with him. The heroic Arjuna, however, by means of his own
celestial weapons checked all the celestial weapons that were aimed at
him by the Gandharvas. And when the chief of the Gandharvas saw that he
was checked by the illustrious Arjuna with those weapons of his he
entirely disappeared from sight by help of his powers of illusion. And
Arjuna, observing that the chief of the Gandharvas was striking at him
concealed from sight, attacked his assailant with celestial weapon
inspired with proper Mantras. And the multiform Dhananjaya filled with
wrath, prevented the disappearance of his foe by means of his weapon
known by the name of Sabda-veda. And assailed with those weapons by the
illustrious Arjuna, his dear friend, the king of the Gandharvas, showed
himself unto him. And Chitrasena said, 'Behold in me thy friend battling
with thee!' And beholding his friend Chitrasena exhausted in the battle,
that bull among the sons of Pandu withdrew the weapons he had shot. And
the other sons of Pandu beholding Arjuna withdraw his weapons, checked
their flying steeds and the impetus of their weapons and withdrew their
bows. And Chitrasena and Bhima and Arjuna and the twins enquiring about
one another's welfare, sat awhile on their respective cars."
