SECTION CCXXXVI
Vaisampayana said, "Having heard these words of Karna, king Duryodhana
became highly pleased. Soon after, however, the prince became melancholy
and addressing the speaker said, 'What thou tellest me, O Karna, is
always before my mind. I shall not, however, obtain permission to repair
to the place where the Pandavas are residing. King Dhritarashtra is
always grieving for those heroes. Indeed, the king regarded the sons of
Pandu to have become more powerful than before in consequence of their
ascetic austerities. Or, if the king understands our motives, he will
never, having regard to the future, grant us permission, for, O thou of
great effulgence, we can have no other business in the woods of
Dwaitavana than the destruction of the Pandavas in exile! Thou knowest
the words that Kshatri spoke to me to thyself, and to the son of Suvala,
at the time of the match at dice! Reflecting upon all those words as also
upon all those lamentations (that he and others indulged in), I cannot
make up my mind as to whether I should or should not go! I shall
certainly be highly pleased if I cast my eyes on Bhima and Phalguna
passing their days in pain with Krishna in the woods. The joy that I may
feel in obtaining the sovereignty of the entire earth is nothing to that
which will be mine upon beholding the sons of Pandu attired in barks of
trees and deer-skins. What joy can be greater, O Karna, that will be mine
upon beholding the daughter of Drupada dressed in red rags in the woods?
If king Yudhishthira and Bhima, the sons of Pandu, behold me graced with
great affluence, then only shall I have attained the great end of my
life! I do not, however, see the means by which I may repair to those
woods, by which, in fact, I may obtain the king's permission to go
thither! Contrive thou, therefore, some skilful plan, with Suvala's son
and Dussasana, by which we may go to those woods! I also, making up my
mind today as to whether I should go or not, approach the presence of the
king tomorrow. And when I shall be sitting with Bhishma--that best of the
Kurus--thou wilt, with Sakuni propose the pretext which thou mayst have
contrived. Hearing then the words of Bhishma and of the king on the
subject of our journey, I will settle everything beseeching our
grandfather.
"Saying; 'So be it,' they then all went away to their respective
quarters. And as soon as the night had passed away, Karna came to the
king. And coming to him, Karna smilingly spoke unto Duryodhana, saying,
'A plan hath been contrived by me. Listen to it, O lord of men! Our herds
are now waiting in the woods of Dwaitavana in expectation of thee!
Without doubt, we may all go there under the pretext of supervising our
cattle stations, for, O monarch, it is proper that kings should
frequently repair to their cattle stations. If this be the motive put
forth, thy father, O prince, will certainly grant thee permission!' And
while Duryodhana and Karna were thus conversing laughingly, Sakuni
addressed them and said, 'This plan, free from difficulties, was what I
also saw for going thither! The king will certainly grant us permission,
or even send us thither of his own accord. Our herds are now all waiting
in the woods of Dwaitavana expecting thee. Without doubt, we may all go
there under the pretext of supervising our cattle stations!'
"They then all three laughed together, and gave their hands unto one
another. And having arrived at that conclusion, they went to see the
chief of Kurus."
