SECTION CCXLVII
Duryodhana said, "That slayer of hostile heroes, Arjuna, then approaching
Chitrasena, smilingly addressed him in these manly words: 'O hero, O
foremost of the Gandharvas, it behoveth thee to set my brothers at
liberty. They are incapable of being insulted as long as the sons of
Pandu are alive.' 'Thus addressed by the illustrious son of Pandu, the
chief of the Gandharvas, O Karna, disclosed unto the Pandavas the object
we had in view in proceeding to that place, viz., that we came there for
casting our eyes on the sons of Pandu with their wife, all plunged in
misery. And while the Gandharva was disclosing those counsels of ours,
overwhelmed with shame I desired the earth to yield me a crevice, so that
I might disappear there and then. The Gandharvas then, accompanied by the
Pandavas, went to Yudhishthira, and, disclosing unto him also counsels,
made us over, bound as we were, to him. Alas, what greater sorrow could
be mine than that I should thus be offered as a tribute unto
Yudhishthira, in the very sight of the women of our household, myself in
chains and plunged in misery, and under the absolute control of my
enemies. Alas, they, who have ever been persecuted by me, they unto whom
I have ever been a foe released me from captivity, and wretch that I am,
I am indebted to them for my life. If, O hero, I had met with my death in
that great battle, that would have been far better than that I should
have obtained my life in this way. If I had been slain by the Gandharvas,
my fame would have spread over the whole earth, and I should have
obtained auspicious regions of eternal bliss in the heaven of Indra.
Listen to me therefore, ye bulls among men, as to what I intend to do
now. I will stay here forgoing all food, while ye all return home. Let
all my brothers also go to Hastinapura. Let all our friends, including
Karna, and all our relatives headed by Dussasana, return now to the
capital. Insulted by the foe, I myself will not repair thither. I who had
before wrested from the foe his respect, I who had always enchanced the
respect of my friends, have now become a source of sorrow unto friends
and of joy unto enemies. What shall I now say unto the king, going to the
city named after the elephant? What will Bhishma and Drona, Kripa, and
Drona's son, Vidura and Sanjaya, Vahuka and Somadatta and other revered
seniors,--what will the principal men of the other orders and men of
independent professions, say to me and what shall I say unto them in
reply? Having hitherto stayed over the heads of my enemies, having
hitherto trod upon their breasts, I have fallen away from my position.
How shall I ever speak with them? Insolent men having obtained prosperity
and knowledge and affluence, are seldom blest for any length of time like
myself puffed up with vanity. Alas, led by folly I have done a highly
improper and wicked act, for which, fool that I am, I have fallen into
such distress. Therefore, will I perish by starving, life having become
insupportable to me. Relieved from distress by the foe, what man of
spirit is there who can drag on his existence? Proud as I am, shorn of
manliness, the foe hath laughed at me, for the Pandavas possessed of
prowess have looked at me plunged in misery!"
Vaisampayana continued, 'While giving way to such reflections Duryodhana
spoke unto Dussasana thus: 'O Dussasana, listen to these words of mine, O
thou of the Bharata race! Accepting this installation that I offer thee,
be thou king in my place. Rule thou the wide earth protected by Karna and
Suvala's sons. Like Indra himself looking after the Maruts, cherish thou
thy brothers in such a way that they may all confide in thee. Let the
friends and relatives depend on thee like the gods depending on him of a
hundred sacrifices. Always shouldst thou bestow pensions on Brahmanas,
without idleness, and be thou ever the refuge of thy friends and
relatives. Like Vishnu looking after the celestials, thou shouldst always
look after all consanguineous relatives. Thou shouldst also ever cherish
thy superiors. Go, rule thou the earth gladdening thy friends and
reproving thy foes.' And clasping his neck, Duryodhana said, 'Go!'
Hearing these words of his, Dussasana in perfect cheerlessness and
overwhelmed with great sorrow, his voice choked in tears, said, with
joined hands and bending his head unto his eldest brother, 'Relent!' And
saying this he fell down on earth with heavy heart. And afflicted with
grief that tiger among men, shedding his tears on the feet of his brother
again said, 'This will never be! The earth may split, the vault of heaven
may break in pieces, the sun may cast off his splendour, the moon may
abandon his coolness, the wind may forsake its speed, the Himavat may be
moved from its site, the waters of the ocean may dry up, and fire may
abandon its heat, yet I, O king, may never rule the earth without thee.'
And Dussasana repeatedly said, 'Relent, O king! Thou alone shall be king
in our race for a hundred years.' And having spoken thus unto the king,
Dussasana began to weep melodiously catching, O Bharata, the feet of his
eldest brother deserving of worship from him.
"And beholding Dussasana and Duryodhana thus weeping, Karna in great
grief approached them both and said, 'Ye, Kuru princes, why do you thus
yield to sorrow like ordinary men, from senselessness? Mere weeping can
never ease a sorrowing man's grief. When weeping can never remove one's
griefs, what do you gain by thus giving way to sorrow? Summon patience to
your aid to not gladden the foe by such conduct. O king, the Pandavas
only did their duty in liberating thee. They that reside in the dominions
of the king, should always do what is agreeable to the king. Protected by
thee, the Pandavas are residing happily in thy dominion. It behoveth thee
not to indulge in such sorrow like an ordinary person. Behold, thy
uterine brothers are all sad and cheerless at seeing thee resolved to put
an end to thy life by forgoing food. Blest be thou! Rise up and come to
thy city and console these thy uterine brothers."
