SECTION CCXLIX
Vaisampayana said, "Beholding king Duryodhana, incapable of putting up
with an insult, seated with the resolution of giving up life by forgoing
food, Sakuni, the son of Suvala, said these words to comfort him. Sakuni
said, O son of the Kuru race, you have just heard what Kama hath said.
His words are, indeed fraught with wisdom. Why wouldst thou abandoning
from foolishness the high prosperity that I won for thee, cast off thy
life today, O king, yielding to silliness? It seemeth to me to-day that
thou hast never waited upon the old. He that cannot control sudden
accession of joy or grief, is lost even though he may have obtained
prosperity, like an unburnt earthen vessel in water. That king who is
entirely destitute of courage, who hath no spark of manliness, who is the
slave of procrastination, who always acts with indiscretion, who is
addicted to sensual pleasures, is seldom respected by his subjects.
Benefited as thou has been, whence is this unreasonable grief of thine?
Do not undo this graceful act done by the sons of Pritha, by indulging in
such grief. When thou shouldst joy and reward the Pandavas, thou art
grieving, O king? Indeed, this behaviour of thine is inconsistent. Be
cheerful, do not cast away thy life; but remember with a pleased heart
the good they have done thee. Give back unto the sons of Pritha their
kingdom, and win thou both virtue and renown by such conduct. By acting
in this way, thou mayst be grateful. Establish brotherly relations with
the Pandavas by being friends, and give them their paternal kingdom, for
then thou wilt be happy!'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Sakuni, and seeing the
brave Dussasana lying prostrate before him unmanned by fraternal love,
the king raised Dussasana and, clasping him in his well round arms, smelt
his head from affection. And hearing these words of Karna and Sauvala,
king Duryodhana lost heart more than ever, and he was overwhelmed with
shame and utter despair overtook his soul. And hearing all that his
friends said, he answered with sorrow, 'I have nothing more to do with
virtue, wealth, friendship, affluence, sovereignty, and enjoyments. Do
not obstruct my purpose, but leave me all of you. I am firmly resolved to
cast away my life by forgoing food. Return to the city, and treat my
superiors there respectfully.'
"Thus addressed by him, they replied unto that royal grinder of foes,
saying, 'O monarch, the course that is thine, is also ours, O Bharata.
How can we enter the city without thee?'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Though addressed in all manner of ways by his
friends and counsellors and brothers and relatives, the king wavered not
from his purpose. And the son of Dhritarashtra in accordance with his
purpose spread Kusa grass on the earth, and purifying himself by touching
water, sat down upon that spot. And clad in rags and Kusa grass he set
himself to observe the highest vow. And stopping all speech, that tiger
among kings, moved by the desire of going to heaven, began to pray and
worship internally suspending all external intercourse.
"Meanwhile the fierce Daityas and the Danavas who had been defeated of
old by the celestials and had been dwelling in the nether regions having
ascertained Duryodhana's purpose and knowing that if the king died their
party would be weakened, commenced a sacrifice with fire for summoning
Duryodhana to their presence. And mantra knowing persons then commenced
with the help of formulae declared by Brihaspati and Usanas, those rites
that are indicated in the Atharva Veda and the Upanishads and which are
capable of being achieved by mantras and prayers. And Brahmins of rigid
vows, well-versed in the Vedas and the branches, began, with rapt soul,
to pour libations of clarified butter and milk into the fire, uttering
mantras. And after those rites were ended, a strange goddess, O king,
with mouth wide open, arose (from the sacrificial fire), saying, 'What am
I to do?' And the Daityas with well-pleased hearts, commanded her,
saying, 'Bring thou hither the royal son of Dhritarashtra, who is even
now observing the vow of starvation for getting rid of his life.' Thus
commanded, she went away saying, 'So be it.' And she went in the
twinkling of an eye to that spot where Suyodhana was. And taking up the
king back to the nether regions, and having brought him thus in a moment,
she apprised the Danavas of it. And the Danavas beholding the king
brought into their midst in the night, united together, and all of them
with well-pleased hearts and eyes expanded in delight addressed these
flattering words to Duryodhana."
