SECTION CCLII
Vaisampayana continued, "Then, O bull among the Bharatas, that mighty
bowman, Karna, surrounded by a large army, besieged the beautiful city of
Drupada. And he, after a hard conflict, brought the hero under
subjection, and, O best of monarchs, made Drupada contribute silver and
gold and gems, and also pay tribute. And, O foremost of kings, having
subdued him, (Karna) brought under subjection those princes that were
under him (Drupada) and made them pay tribute. Then going to the north,
he subdued the sovereigns (of that quarter) and having effected the
defeat of Bhagadatta, Radha's son ascended that mighty mountain Himavat,
all along fighting his foes. And ranging all sides, he conquered and
brought under subjection all the kings inhabiting the Himavat, and made
them pay dues. Then descending from the mountain and rushing to the east,
he reduced the Angas, and the Bangas, and the Kalingas, and the Mandikas,
and the Magadhas. the Karkakhandas; and also included with them the
Avasiras, Yodhyas, and the Ahikshatras. Having (thus) conquered the
eastern quarter Karna then presented himself before Batsa-bhumi. And
having taken Batsa-bhumi, he reduced Kevali, and Mrittikavati, and Mohana
and Patrana, and Tripura, and Kosala,--and compelled all these to pay
tribute. Then going to the south, Karna vanquished the mighty charioteers
(of that quarter) and in Dakshinatya, the Suta's son entered into
conflict with Rukmi. After having fought dreadfully, Rukmi spake to the
Suta's son saying, 'O foremost of monarchs, I have been pleased with thy
might and prowess. I shall not do thee wrong: I have only fulfilled the
vow of a Kshatriya. Gladly will I give thee as many gold coins as thou
desirest.' Having met with Rukmi, Karna, repaired to Pandya and the
mountain, Sri. And by fighting, he made Karala, king Nila, Venudari's
son, and other best of kings living in the southern direction pay
tribute. Then going to Sisupala's son, the son of the Suta defeated him
and that highly powerful one also brought under his sway all the
neighbouring rulers. And, O bull of the Bharata race, having subjugated
the Avantis and concluded peace with them, and having met with the
Vrishnis, he conquered the west. And, having come to the quarter of
Varuna, he made all the Yavana and Varvara kings pay tribute. And, having
conquered the entire earth--east, west, north and south--that hero
without any aid brought under subjection all the nations of the
Mlechchhas, the mountaineers, the Bhadras, the Rohitakas, the Agneyas and
the Malavas. And, having conquered the mighty charioteers, headed by the
Nagnajitas, the Suta's son brought the Sasakas and the Yavanas under his
sway. Having thus conquered and brought under his subjection the world,
the mighty charioteer and tiger among men came (back) to Hastinapura.
That lord of men, Dhritarashtra's son, accompanied by his father and
brothers and friends, came to that mighty bowman, who had arrived, and
duly paid homage unto Karna crowned with martial merit. And the king
proclaimed his feats, saying, 'What I have not received from either
Bhishma, or Drona, or Kripa, or Vahlika, I have received from thee. May
good betide thee! What need of speaking at length! Hear my words, O
Karna! In thee, O chief of men, I have my refuge. O mighty-armed one. O
tiger among men, without doubt all the Pandavas and the other kings
crowned with prosperity, come not to a sixteenth part of thee. Do thou, O
mighty bowman, O Karna, see Dhritarashtra, and the illustrious Gandhari,
as the bearer of the thunderbolt did Aditi.'
"Then, O king, there arose in the city of Hastinapura a clamour, and
sounds of Oh! and Alas! and, O lord of men, some of the kings praised him
(Karna), while others censured him, while others, again, remained silent.
Having thus, O foremost of monarchs, in a short time conquered this earth
furnished with mountains and forests and skies, and with oceans, and
fields, and filled with high and low tracts, and cities, and replete also
with islands. O lord of earth, and brought the monarchs under
subjection,--and having gained imperishable wealth, the Suta's son
appeared before the king. Then, O represser of foes, entering into the
interior of the palace that hero saw Dhritarashtra with Gandhari, O tiger
among men, that one conversant with morality took hold of his feet even
like a son. And Dhritarashtra embraced him affectionately, and then
dismissed him. Ever since that time, O monarch, O Bharata, king
Duryodhana and Sakuni, the son of Suvala, thought that Pritha's sons had
already been defeated in battle by Karna."
