SECTION CCXLVIII
"Kama continued, 'O king, this conduct of thine to-day appeareth to be
childish. O hero, O slayer of foes, what is to be wondered at in this
that the Pandavas liberated thee when thou wert vanquished by the foe? O
son of the Kuru race, those that reside in the territories of the king,
especially those (amongst them) that lead the profession of arms, should
always do what is agreeable to the king whether they happen to be known
to their monarch or unknown to him. It happened often that foremost men
who crush the ranks of the hostile host, are vanquished by them, and are
rescued by their own troops. They that leading the profession of arms,
reside in the king's realm should always combine and exert themselves to
the best of their power, for the king. If, therefore, O king, the
Pandavas, who live in the territories, have liberated thee, what is there
to be regretted at in this? That the Pandavas, O best of kings, did not
follow thee when thou didst march forth to battle at the head of thy
troops, has been an improper act on their part. They had before this come
under thy power, becoming thy slaves. They are, therefore, bound to aid
thee now, being endued with courage and might and incapable of turning
away from the field of battle. Thou art enjoying all the rich possessions
of the Pandavas. Behold them yet alive, O king! They have not resolved to
die, forgoing all food. Blest be thou! Rise up, O king! It behoveth thee
not to indulge in great sorrow long. O king, it is the certain duty of
those that reside in the king's realm to do what is agreeable to the
king. Where should the regret be in all this? If thou, O king, dost not
act according to my words I shall stay here employed in reverentially
serving thy feet. O bull among men, I do not desire to live deprived of
thy company. O king, if thou resolvest to slay thyself by forgoing food,
thou wilt simply be an object of laughter with other kings."
Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Karna, king Duryodhana, firmly
resolved to leave the world, desired not to rise from where he sat."
