SECTION CCLXIII
Kotika said, "Excellent lady, who art thou that standest alone, leaning
on a branch of the Kadamva tree at this hermitage and looking grand like
a flame of fire blazing at night time, and fanned by the wind?
Exquisitely beautiful as thou art, how is it that thou feelest not any
fear in these forests? Methinks thou art a goddess, or a Yakshi, or a
Danavi, or an excellent Apsara, or the wife of a Daitya, or a daughter of
the Naga king, or a Rakshasi or the wife of Varuna, or of Yama, or of
Soma, or of Kuvera, who, having assumed a human form, wanderest in these
forests. Or, hast thou come from the mansions of Dhatri, or of Vidhatri,
or of Savitri, or of Vibhu, or of Sakra? Thou dost not ask us who we are,
nor do we know who protects thee here! Respectfully do we ask thee, good
lady, who is thy powerful father, and, O, do tell us truly the names of
thy husband, thy relatives, and thy race, and tell us also what thou dost
here. As for us, I am king Suratha's son whom people know by the name of
Kotika, and that man with eyes large as the petals of the lotus, sitting
on a chariot of gold, like the sacrificial fire on the altar, is the
warrior known by the name of Kshemankara, king of Trigarta. And behind
him is the famous son of the king of Pulinda, who is even now gazing on
thee. Armed with a mighty bow and endued with large eyes, and decorated
with floral wreaths, he always liveth on the breasts of mountains. The
dark and handsome young man, the scourge of his enemies, standing at the
edge of that tank, is the son of Suvala of the race of Ikshwaku. And if,
O excellent lady, thou hast ever heard the name of Jayadratha, the king
of Sauviras, even he is there at the head of six thousand chariots, with
horses and elephants and infantry, and followed by twelve Sauvira princes
as his standard-bearers, named Angaraka, Kunjara, Guptaka, Satrunjaya,
Srinjaya, Suprabiddha, Prabhankara, Bhramara, Ravi, Sura, Pratapa and
Kuhana, all mounted on chariots drawn by chestnut horses and every one of
them looking like the fire on the sacrificial altar. The brothers also of
the king, viz., the powerful Valahaka, Anika, Vidarana and others, are
among his followers. These strong-limbed and noble youths are the flowers
of the Sauvira chivalry. The king is journeying in the company of these
his friends, like Indra surrounded by the Maruts. O fine-haired lady, do
tell us that are unacquainted (with these matters), whose wife and whose
daughter thou art."
