SECTION CCLX
Janamejaya said, "While the high-souled Pandavas were living in those
woods, delighted with the pleasant conversation they held with the Munis,
and engaged in distributing the food they obtained from the sun, with
various kinds of venison to Brahmanas and others that came to them for
edibles till the hour of Krishna's meal, how, O great Muni, did
Duryodhana and the other wicked and sinful sons of Dhritarashtra, guided
by the counsels of Dussasana, Karna and Sakuni, deal with them? I ask
thee this. Do thou, worshipful Sir, enlighten me."
Vaisampayana said, "When, O great king, Duryodhana heard that the
Pandavas were living as happily in the woods as in a city, he longed,
with the artful Karna, Dussasana and others, to do them harm. And while
those evil-minded persons were employed in concerting various wicked
designs, the virtuous and celebrated ascetic Durvasa, following the bent
of his own will, arrived at the city of the Kurus with ten thousand
disciples. And seeing the irascible ascetic arrived, Duryodhana and his
brothers welcomed him with great humility, self-abasement and gentleness.
And himself attending on the Rishi as a menial, the prince gave him a
right worshipful reception. And the illustrious Muni stayed there for a
few days, while king Duryodhana, watchful of his imprecations, attended
on him diligently by day and night. And sometimes the Muni would say, 'I
am hungry, O king, give me some food quickly.' And sometimes he would go
out for a bath and, returning at a late hour, would say, 'I shall not eat
anything today as I have no appetite,' and so saying would disappear from
his sight. And sometimes, coming all on a sudden, he would say, 'Feed us
quickly.' And at other times, bent on some mischief, he would awake at
midnight and having caused his meals to be prepared as before, would carp
at them and not partake of them at all. And trying the prince in this way
for a while, when the Muni found that the king Duryodhana was neither
angered, nor annoyed, he became graciously inclined towards him. And
then, O Bharata, the intractable Durvasa said unto him, 'I have power to
grant thee boons. Thou mayst ask of me whatever lies nearest to thy
heart. May good fortune be thine. Pleased as I am with thee, thou mayst
obtain from me anything that is not opposed to religion and morals.'
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of the great ascetic,
Suyodhana felt himself to be inspired with new life. Indeed, it had been
agreed upon between himself and Karna and Dussasana as to what the boon
should be that he would ask of the Muni if the latter were pleased with
his reception. And the evil-minded king, bethinking himself of what had
previously been decided, joyfully solicited the following favour, saying,
'The great king Yudhishthira is the eldest and the best of our race. That
pious man is now living in the forest with his brothers. Do thou,
therefore, once become the guest of that illustrious one even as, O
Brahmana, thou hast with thy disciples been mine for some time. If thou
art minded to do me a favour, do thou go unto him at a time when that
delicate and excellent lady, the celebrated princess of Panchala, after
having regaled with food the Brahmanas, her husbands and herself, may lie
down to rest.' The Rishi replied, 'Even so shall I act for thy
satisfaction.' And having said this to Suyodhana, that great Brahmana,
Durvasa, went away in the very same state in which he had come. And
Suyodhana regarded himself to have attained all the objects of his
desire. And holding Karna by the hand he expressed great satisfaction.
And Karna, too, joyfully addressed the king in the company of his
brothers, saying, 'By a piece of singular good luck, thou hast fared well
and attained the objects of thy desire. And by good luck it is that thy
enemies have been immersed in a sea of dangers that is difficult to
cross. The sons of Pandu are now exposed to the fire of Durvasa's wrath.
Through their own fault they have fallen into an abyss of darkness.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "O king, expressing their satisfaction in this
strain, Duryodhana and others, bent on evil machinations, returned
merrily to their respective homes."
