SECTION CCLXIV
Vaisampayana continued, "The princess Draupadi, thus questioned by that
ornament of Sivi's race, moved her eyes gently, and letting go her hold
of the Kadamva blanch and arranging her silken apparel she said, I am
aware, O prince, that it is not proper for a person like me to address
you thus, but as there is not another man or woman here to speak with
thee and as I am alone here just now, let me, therefore, speak. Know,
worthy sir, that being alone in this forest here, I should not speak unto
thee, remembering the usages of my sex. I have learned, O Saivya, that
thou art Suratha's son, whom people know by the name of Kotika.
Therefore, on my part, I shall now tell thee of my relations and renowned
race. I am the daughter of king Drupada, and people know me by the name
of Krishna, and I have accepted as my husbands, five persons of whom you
may have heard while they were living at Kahandavaprastha. Those noble
persons, viz., Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna, and the two sons of
Madri, leaving me here and having assigned unto themselves the four
points of the horizon, have gone out on a hunting excursion. The king
hath gone to the east, Bhimasena towards the south, Arjuna to the west,
and the twin brothers towards the north! Therefore, do ye now alight and
dismiss your carriages so that ye may depart after receiving a due
welcome from them. The high-souled son of Dharma is fond of guests and
will surely be delighted to see you!' Having addressed Saivya's son in
this way, the daughter of Drupada, with face beautiful as the moon,
remembering well her husband's character for hospitality, entered her
spacious cottage."
