SECTION CCLXXIX
"Markandeya said, 'And while the chaste Sita was dwelling there afflicted
with melancholy and grief on account of her lord, attired in mean garb,
with but a single jewel (on the marital thread on her wrist), and
incessantly weeping, seated on a stone, and waited upon by Rakshasa
women, Ravana, afflicted by the shafts of the god of desire, came to her
and approached her presence. And inflamed by desire, that conquerer in
battle of the gods, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, and the
Kimpurushas, attired in celestial robes and possessing handsome features,
decked with jewelled earrings and wearing a beautiful garland and crown,
entered the Asoka woods, like an embodiment of the vernal season. And
dressed with care, Ravana looked like the Kalpa tree in Indra's garden.
But though adorned with every embellishment, that inspired her only with
awe, like a beautified banian in the midst of a cemetery. And that night
wanderer, having approached the presence of that slender-waisted lady,
looked like the planet Saturn in the presence of Rohini. And smitten with
the shafts of the god of the flowery emblem he accosted that fair-hipped
lady then affrighted like a helpless doe, and told her these words, 'Thou
hast, O Sita, shown thy regard for thy lord too much! O thou of delicate
limbs, be merciful unto me. Let thy person be embellished now (by these
maids in waiting). O excellent lady, accept me as thy lord! And, O thou
of the most beautiful complexion, attired in costly robes and ornaments,
take thou the first place among all the women of my household. Many are
the daughters of the celestials and also the Gandharvas that I possess! I
am lord also of many Danava and Daitya ladies! One hundred and forty
millions of Pisachas, twice as many man-eating Rakshasa of terrible deed,
and thrice as many Yaksha do my bidding! Some of these are under the sway
of my brother who is the lord of all treasures. In my drinking hall, O
excellent lady of beautiful thighs, Gandharvas and Apsaras wait on me as
they do on my brother! I am, again, the son of that regenerate Rishi
Visravas himself of high ascetic merit. I am renowned, again, as the
fifth Regent of the Universe! And, O beautiful lady, of food and edibles
and drinks of the very best kind, I have as much as the Lord himself of
the celestials! Let all thy troubles consequent on a life in the woods
cease! O thou of fair hips, be my Queen, as Mandodari herself!' Thus
addressed by him, the beautiful princess of Videha, turning away and
regarding him as something less than a straw, replied unto that wanderer
of the night. And at that time the princess of Videha, that girl of
beautiful hips, had her deep and compact bosom copiously drenched by her
inauspicious tears shed ceaselessly. And she who regarded her husband as
her god, answered that mean wretch, saying, 'By sheer ill-luck it is, O
king of the Rakshasas, that I am obliged to hear such words of grievous
import spoken by thee! Blessed be thou, O Rakshasa fond of sensual
pleasures, let thy heart be withdrawn from me! I am the wife of another,
ever devoted to my husband, and, therefore, incapable of being possessed
by thee! A helpless human being that I am, I cannot be a fit wife for
thee! What joy can be thine by using violence towards an unwilling woman?
Thy father is a wise Brahmana, born of Brahma and equal unto that Lord
himself of the creation! Why dost thou not, therefore, thyself being
equal to a Regent of the Universe, observe virtue? Disgracing thy
brother, that king of the Yakshas, that adorable one who is the friend of
Maheswara himself, that lord of treasures, how is it that thou feelest no
shame?' Having said these words, Sita began to weep, her bosom shivering
in agitation, and covering her neck and face with her garments. And the
long and well-knit braid, black and glossy, falling from the head of the
weeping lady, looked like a black snake. And hearing these cruel words
uttered by Sita, the foolish Ravana, although thus rejected, addressed
Sita once more, saying, 'O lady, let the god having the Makara for his
emblem burn me sorely. I will, however, on no account, O thou of sweet
smiles and beautiful hips, approach thee, as thou art unwilling! What can
I do to thee that still feelest a regard for Rama who is only a human
being and, therefore, our food?' Having said those words unto that lady
of faultless features, the king of the Rakshasa made himself invisible
then and there and went away to the place he liked. And Sita, surrounded
by those Rakshasa women, and treated with tenderness by Trijata,
continued to dwell there in grief."
