SECTION CCLXXVIII
"Markandeya said, 'Afflicted with grief at the abduction of Sita, Rama
had not to go much further before he came upon Pampa--that lake which
abounded with lotuses of various kinds. And fanned by the cool, delicious
and fragrant breezes in those woods, Rama suddenly remembered his dear
spouse. And, O mighty monarch, thinking of that dear wife of his, and
afflicted at the thought of his separation from her, Rama gave way to
lamentations. The son of Sumitra then addressed him saying, 'O thou that
givest proper respect to those that deserve it, despondency such as this
should not be suffered to approach thee, like illness that can never
touch an old man leading a regular life! Thou hast obtained information
of Ravana and of the princess of Videha! Liberate her now with exertion
and intelligence! Let us now approach Sugriva, that foremost of monkeys,
who is even now on the mountain top! Console thyself, when I, thy
disciple and slave and ally, am near!' And addressed by Lakshmana in
these and other words of the same import, Rama regained his own nature
and attended to the business before him. And bathing in the waters of
Pampa and offering oblations therewith unto their ancestors, both those
heroic brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, set out (for Rishyamuka). And
arriving at Rishyamuka which abounded with fruits and roots and trees,
those heroes beheld five monkeys on the top of the mountain-peak. And
seeing them approach, Sugriva sent his counsellor the intelligent
Hanuman, huge as the Himavat-mountains, to receive them. And the
brothers, having first exchanged words with Hanuman, approached Sugriva.
And then, O king, Rama made friends with Sugriva. And when Rama informed
Sugriva of the object he had in view, Sugriva showed him the piece of
cloth that Sita had dropped among the monkeys, while being carried away
by Ravana. And having obtained from him those credentials, Rama himself
installed Sugriva--that foremost of monkeys--in sovereignty of all the
monkeys of Earth. And Rama also pledged himself to slay Vali in battle.
And having come to that understanding and placing the fullest confidence
in each other, they all repaired to Kiskindhya, desirous of battle (with
Vali). And arriving at Kiskindhya, Sugriva sent forth a loud roar deep as
that of a cataract. Unable to bear that challenge, Vali was for coming
out (but his wife) Tara stood in way, saying, 'Himself endued with great
strength, the way in which Sugriva is roaring, showeth, I ween, that he
hath found assistance! It behoveth thee not, therefore, to go out! Thus
addressed by her, that king of the monkeys, the eloquent Vali, decked in
a golden garland replied unto Tara of face beautiful as the moon, saying,
'Thou understandest the voice of every creature. Tell me after reflection
whose help it is that this brother in name only of mine hath obtained!'
Thus addressed by him Tara endued with wisdom and possessed of the
effulgence of the moon, answered her lord after a moment's reflection,
saying, 'Listen, O monarch of the monkeys! That foremost of bowmen,
endued with great might, Rama the son of Dasaratha, whose spouse hath
been ravished, hath made an alliance offensive and defensive with
Sugriva! And his brother the intelligent Lakshmana also of mighty arms,
the unvanquished son of Sumitra, standeth beside him for the success of
Sugriva's object. And Mainda and Dwivida, and Hanuman the son of Pavana,
and Jamvuman, the king of the bears, are beside Sugriva as his
counsellors. All these illustrious ones are endued with great strength
and intelligence. And these all, depending upon the might and energy of
Rama, are prepared for thy destruction!' Hearing these words of hers that
were for his benefit, the king of the monkeys disregarded them
altogether. And filled with jealousy, he also suspected her to have set
her heart on Sugriva! And addressing Tara in harsh words, he went out of
his cave and coming before Sugriva who was staying by the side of the
mountains of Malyavat, he spoke unto him thus, 'Frequently vanquished
before by me, fond as thou art of life, thou art allowed by me to escape
with life owing to thy relationship with me! What hath made thee wish for
death so soon?' Thus addressed by Vali, Sugriva, that slayer of foes, as
if addressing Rama himself for informing him of what had happened,
replied unto his brother in these words of grave import, 'O king, robbed
by thee of my wife and my kingdom also, what need have I of life? Know
that it is for this that I have come!' Then addressing each other in
these and other words of the same import, Vali and Sugriva rushed to the
encounter, fighting with Sala and Tala trees and stones. And they struck
each other down on the earth. And leaping high into the air, they struck
each other with their fists. And mangled by each other's nail and teeth,
both of them were covered with blood. And the two heroes shone on that
account like a pair of blossoming Kinshukas. And as they fought with each
other, no difference (in aspect) could be observed so as to distinguish
them. Then Hanuman placed on Sugriva's neck a garland of flowers. And
that hero thereupon shone with that garland on his neck, like the
beautiful and huge peak of Malya with its cloudy belt. And Rama,
recognising Sugriva by that sign, then drew his foremost of huge bows,
aiming at Vali as his mark. And the twang of Rama's bow resembled the
roar of an engine. And Vali, pierced in the heart by that arrow, trembled
in fear. And Vali, his heart having been pierced through, began to vomit
forth blood. And he then beheld standing before him Rama with Sumatra's
son by his side. And reproving that descendant of Kakutstha's race, Vali
fell down on the ground and became senseless. And Tara then beheld that
lord of hers possessed of the effulgence of the Moon, lying prostrate on
the bare earth. And after Vali had been thus slain, Sugriva regained
possession of Kishkindhya, and along with it, of the widowed Tara also of
face beautiful as the moon. And the intelligent Rama also dwelt on the
beautiful breast of the Malyavat hill for four months, duly worshipped by
Sugriva all the while.
"Meanwhile Ravana excited by lust, having reached his city of Lanka,
placed Sita in an abode, resembling Nandana itself, within a forest of
Asokas, that looked like an asylum of ascetics. And the large-eyed Sita
passed her days there in distress, living on fruits and roots, practising
ascetic austerities with fasts, attired in ascetic garb, and waning thin
day by day, thinking of her absent lord. And the king of the Rakshasas
appointed many Rakshasa women armed with bearded darts and swords and
lances and battle-axes and maces and flaming brands, for guarding her.
And some of these had two eyes, and some three. And some had eyes on
their foreheads. And some had long tongues and some had none. And some
had three breasts and some had only one leg. And some had three matted
braids on their heads, and some had only one eye. And these, and others
of blazing eyes and hair stiff as the camel's, stood beside Sita
surrounding her day and night most watchfully. And those Pisacha women of
frightful voice and terrible aspect always addressed that large-eyed lady
in the harshest tones. And they said, 'Let us eat her up, let us mangle
her, let us tear her into pieces, her, that is, that dwelleth here
disregarding our lord!' And filled with grief at the separation from her
lord, Sita drew a deep sigh and answered those Rakshasa women, saying,
'Reverend ladies, eat me up without delay! I have no desire to live
without that husband of mine, of eyes like lotus-leaves and locks wavy,
and blue in hue! Truly I will, without food and without the least love of
life, emaciate my limbs, like a she-snake (hibernating) within a Tala
tree. Know this for certain that I will never seek the protection of any
other person than the descendant of Raghu. And knowing this, do what ye
think fit!' And hearing these words of hers, those Rakshasas with
dissonant voice went to the king of the Rakshasas, for representing unto
him all she had said. And when those Rakshasas had gone away, one of
their number known by the name of Trijata, who was virtuous and agreeable
in speech, began to console the princess of Videha. And she said,
'Listen, O Sita! I will tell thee something! O friend, believe in what I
say! O thou of fair hips, cast off thy fears, and listen to what I say.
There is an intelligent and old chief of the Rakshasas known by the name
of Avindhya. He always seeketh Rama's good and hath told me these words
for thy sake! 'Reassuring and cheering her, tell Sita in my name, saying:
'Thy husband the mighty Rama is well and is waited upon by Lakshmana. And
the blessed descendant of Raghu hath already made friends with Sugriva,
the king of the monkeys, and is ready to act for thee! And, O timid lady,
entertain thou no fear on account of Ravana, who is censured by the whole
world, for, O daughter, thou art safe from him on account of Nalakuvera's
curse. Indeed, this wretch had been cursed before for his having violated
his daughter-in-law, Rambha. This lustful wretch is not able to violate
any woman by force. Thy husband will soon come, protected by Sugriva and
with the intelligent son of Sumitra in his train, and will soon take thee
away hence! O lady, I have had a most terrible dream of evil omen,
indicating the destruction of this wicked-minded wretch of Pulastya's
race! This night wanderer of mean deeds is, indeed, most wicked and
cruel. He inspireth terror in all by the defects of his nature and the
wickedness of his conduct. And deprived of his senses by Fate, he
challengeth the very gods. In my vision I have seen every indication of
his downfall. I have seen the Ten-headed, with his crown shaven and body
besmeared with oil, sunk in mire, and the next moment dancing on a
chariot drawn by mules. I have seen Kumbhakarna and others, perfectly
naked and with crowns shaven, decked with red wreaths and unguents, and
running towards the southern direction. Vibhishana alone, with umbrella
over his head, and graced with a turban, and with body decked with white
wreaths and unguents, I beheld ascending the summit of the White hill.
And I saw four of his counsellors also, decked with white wreaths and
unguents, ascending the summit of that hill along with him. All this
bodeth that these alone will be saved from the impending terror. The
whole earth with its oceans and seas will be enveloped with Rama's
arrows. O lady, thy husband will fill the whole earth with his fame. I
also saw Lakshmana, consuming all directions (with his arrows) and
ascending on a heap of bones and drinking thereon honey and rice boiled
in milk. And thou, O lady, hast been beheld by me running towards a
northernly direction, weeping and covered with blood and protected by a
tiger! And, O princess of Videha, soon wilt thou find happiness, being
united, O Sita, with thy lord, that descendant of Raghu accompanied by
his brother!' Hearing these words of Trijata, that girl with eyes like
those of a young gazelle, once more began to entertain hopes of a union
with her lord. And when at last those fierce and cruel Pisacha guards
came back, they saw her sitting with Trijata as before."
