SECTION CCLXXV
"Yudhishthira said, 'O adorable one, thou hast described to me in detail
the history of the birth of Rama and others. I wish to learn the cause of
their exile. Do thou, O Brahmana, relate why the sons of Dasaratha--the
brothers Rama and Lakshmana--went to the forest with famous princess of
Mithila.'
"Markandeya said, 'The pious king Dasaratha, ever mindful of the old and
assiduous in religious ceremonies, was greatly pleased when these sons
were born. And his sons gradually grew up in might and they became
conversant with the Vedas together with all their mysteries, and with the
science of arms. And when after having gone through the Brahmacharyya
vows the princes were married, king Dasaratha became happy and highly
pleased. And the intelligent Rama, the eldest of them all, became the
favourite of his father, and greatly pleased the people with his charming
ways. And then, O Bharata, the wise king, considering himself old in
years took counsel with his virtuous ministers and spiritual adviser for
installing Rama as regent of the kingdom. And all those great ministers
were agreed that it was time to do so. And, O scion of Kuru's race, king
Dasaratha was greatly pleased to behold his son,--that enhancer of
Kausalya's delight--possessed of eyes that were red, and arms that were
sinewy. And his steps were like those of a wild elephant. And he had long
arms and high shoulders and black and curly hair. And he was valiant, and
glowing with splendour, and not inferior to Indra himself in battle. And
he was well-versed in holy writ and was equal to Vrihaspati in wisdom. An
object of love with all the people, he was skilled in every science. And
with senses under complete control, his very enemies were pleased to
behold him. And he was terror of the wicked and the protector of the
virtuous. And possessed of intelligence and incapable of being baffled,
he was victorious over all and never vanquished by any. And, O descendant
of Kurus, beholding his son--that enhancer of Kausalya's joy--king
Dasaratha became highly pleased. And reflecting on Rama's virtues, the
powerful and mighty king cheerfully addressed the family priest, saying,
'Blessed be thou, O Brahmana! This night of the Pushya constellation will
bring in a very auspicious conjunction. Let, therefore, materials be
collected and let Rama also be invited. This Pushya constellation will
last till tomorrow. And Rama, therefore, should be invested by me and my
ministers as prince-regent of all my subjects!'
"Meanwhile Manthara (the maid of Kaikeyi), hearing these words of the
king, went to her mistress, and spoke unto her as was suited to the
occasion. And she said, 'Thy great ill-luck, O Kaikeyi, hath this day
been proclaimed by the king! O unlucky one, mayst thou be bitten by a
fierce and enraged snake of virulent poison! Kausalya, indeed, is
fortunate, as it is her son that is going to be installed on the throne.
Where, indeed, is thy prosperity, when thy son obtaineth not the kingdom?'
"Hearing these words of her maid, the slender-waisted and beautiful
Kaikeyi put on all her ornaments, and sought her husband in a secluded
place. And with a joyous heart, and smiling pleasantly, she addressed
these words to him with all the blandishments of love, 'O king, thou art
always true to thy promises. Thou didst promise before to grant me an
object of my desire. Do thou fulfil that promise now and save thyself
from the sin of unredeemed pledge!' The king replied, saying, 'I will
grant thee a boon. Ask thou whatever thou wishest! What man undeserving
of death shall be slain today and who that deserves death is to be set at
liberty? Upon whom shall I bestow wealth to-day, or whose wealth shall be
confiscated? Whatever wealth there is in this world, save what belongeth
to Brahmanas, is mine! I am the king of kings in this world, and the
protector of all the four classes! Tell me quickly, O blessed lady, what
that object is upon which thou hast set thy heart!' Hearing these words
of the king, and tying him fast to his pledge, and conscious also of her
power over him, she addressed him in these words, 'I desire that Bharata
be the recipient of that investiture which thou hast designed for Rama,
and let Rama go into exile living in the forest of Dandaka for fourteen
years as an ascetic with matted locks on head and robed in rags and
deer-skins!' Hearing these disagreeable words of cruel import, the king,
O chief of the Bharata race, was sorely afflicted and became utterly
speechless! But the mighty and virtuous Rama, learning that his father
had been thus solicited, went into the forest so that the king's truth
might remain inviolate. And, blessed be thou, he was followed by the
auspicious Lakshmana--that foremost of bowmen and his wife Sita, the
princess of Videha and daughter of Janaka. And after Rama had gone into
the forest, king Dasaratha took leave of his body, agreeably to the
eternal law of time. And knowing that Rama not near and that the king was
dead, queen Kaikeyi, causing Bharata to be brought before her, addressed
him in these words, 'Dasaratha hath gone to heaven and both Rama and
Lakshmana are in the forest! Take thou this kingdom which is so extensive
and whose peace there is no rival to disturb'. Thereupon the virtuous
Bharata replied unto her saying, 'Thou hast done a wicked deed, having
slain thy husband and exterminated this family from lust of wealth alone!
Heaping infamy on my head, O accursed woman of our race, thou hast, O
mother, attained this, thy object!' And having said these words, the
prince wept aloud. And having proved his innocence before all the
subjects of that realm he set out in the wake of Rama, desiring to bring
him back. And placing Kausalya and Sumitra and Kaikeyi in the vehicles at
the van of his train, he proceeded with a heavy heart, in company with
Satrughna. And he was accompanied by Vasishtha and Vamadeva, and other
Brahmanas by thousands and by the people of the cities and the provinces,
desiring to bring back Rama. And he saw Rama with Lakshmana, living on
the mountains of Chitrakuta with bow in hand and decked with the
ornaments of ascetics. Bharata, however, was dismissed by Rama, who was
determined to act according to the words, of his father. And returning,
Bharata ruled at Nandigrama, keeping before him, his brother's wooden
sandals. And Rama fearing a repetition of intrusion by the people of
Ayodhya, entered into the great forest towards the asylum of Sarabhanga.
And having paid his respects to Sarabhanga, he entered the forest of
Dandaka and took up his abode on the banks of beautiful river Godavari.
And while living there, Rama was inveigled into hostilities with Khara,
then dwelling in Janasthana, on account of Surpanakha. And for the
protection of the ascetics the virtuous scion of Raghu's race slew
fourteen thousand Rakshasas on earth, and having slain those mighty
Rakshasas, Khara and Dushana, the wise descendant of Raghu once more made
that sacred forest free from danger.'
"And after these Rakshasas had been slain, Surpanakha with mutilated nose
and lips, repaired to Lanka--the abode of her brother (Ravana). And when
that Rakshasa woman, senseless with grief and with dry blood-stains on
her face, appeared before Ravana, she fell down at his feet. And
beholding her so horribly mutilated, Ravana became senseless with wrath
and grinding his teeth sprung up from his seat. And dismissing his
ministers, he enquired of her in private, saying, 'Blessed sister, who
hath made thee so, forgetting and disregarding me? Who is he that having
got a sharp-pointed spear hath rubbed his body with it? Who is he that
sleepeth in happiness and security, after placing a fire close to his
head? Who is he that hath trodden upon a revengeful snake of virulent
poison? Who indeed, is that person who standeth with his hand thrust into
the mouth of the maned lion!' Then flames of wrath burst forth from his
body, like those that are emitted at night from the hollows of a tree on
fire. His sister then related unto him the prowess of Rama and the defeat
of the Rakshasas with Khara and Dushana at their head. Informed of the
slaughter of his relatives, Ravana, impelled by Fate, remembered Maricha
for slaying Rama. And resolving upon the course he was to follow and
having made arrangements for the government of his capital, he consoled
his sister, and set out on an aerial voyage. And crossing the Trikuta and
the Kala mountains, he beheld the vast receptacle of deep waters--the
abode of the Makaras. Then crossing the Ocean, the Ten headed Ravana
reached Gokarna--the favourite resort of the illustrious god armed with
the trident. And there Ravana met with his old friend Maricha who, from
fear of Rama himself, had adopted an ascetic mode of life.'"
