SECTION CCLXXXI
"Markandeya said, 'It was on the breast of that very hill where Rama was
seated with those foremost of monkeys that great monkey chiefs at the
command of Sugriva, began to flock together. The father-in-law of Vali,
the illustrious Sushena, accompanied by a thousand crores of active apes,
came to Rama. And those two foremost of monkeys endued with mighty
energy, viz., Gaya and Gavakshya, each accompanied by a hundred crores of
monkeys, showed themselves there. And, O king, Gavakshya also of terrible
mien and endued with a bovine tail, showed himself there, having
collected sixty thousand crores of monkeys. And the renowned
Gandhamadana, dwelling on the mountains of the same name, collected a
hundred thousand crores of monkeys. And the intelligent and mighty monkey
known by the name of Panasa mustered together fifty-two crores of
monkeys.[94] And that foremost and illustrious of monkeys named
Dadhimukha of mighty energy mustered a large army of monkeys possessed of
terrible prowess. And Jamvuvan showed himself there with a hundred
thousand crores of black bears of terrible deeds and faces having the
Tilaka mark.[95] And these and many other chiefs of monkey-chiefs,
countless in number, O king, came there for aiding Rama's cause. And
endued with bodies huge as mountain-peaks and roaring like lions, loud
was the uproar that was heard there made by those monkeys running
restlessly from place to place. And some of them looked like
mountain-peaks, and some looked like buffaloes. And some were of the hue
of autumnal clouds and the faces of some were red as vermillion. And some
rose high, and some fell down, and some cut capers, and some scattered
the dust, as they mustered together from various directions. And that
monkey army, vast as the sea at full tide, encamped there at Sugriva's
bidding. And after those foremost of monkeys had mustered from every
direction, the illustrious descendant of Raghu, with Sugriva by his side,
set out in an auspicious moment of a very fair day under a lucky
constellation, accompanied by that host arrayed in order of battle, as if
for the purpose of destroying all the worlds. And Hanuman, the son of the
Wind-god, was in the van of that host, while the rear was protected by
the fearless son of Sumitra. And surrounded by the monkey-chiefs, those
princes of Raghu's house with fingers cased in guana skin, shone, as they
went, like the Sun and the Moon in the midst of the planets. And that
monkey host armed with stones and Sala and Tala trees, looked very much
like a far-extending field of corn under the morning sun. And that mighty
army, protected by Nala and Nila and Angada and Kratha and Mainda and
Dwivida, marched forth for achieving the purpose of Raghava. And
encamping successively, without interruption of any kind, on wide and
healthy tracts and valleys abounding with fruits and roots and water and
honey and meat, the monkey host at last reached the shores of the briny
sea. And like unto a second ocean, that mighty army with its countless
colours, having reached the shores of sea, took up its abode there. Then
the illustrious son of Dasaratha, addressing Sugriva amongst all those
foremost monkeys, spoke unto him these words that were suited to the
occasion, 'This army is large. The ocean also is difficult to cross. What
contrivance, therefore, commends itself to thee for crossing the ocean?'
At these words, many vain-glorious monkeys answered, 'We are fully able
to cross the sea.' This answer, however, was not of much use, as all
could not avail of that means. Some of the monkeys proposed to cross the
sea in boats, and some in rafts of various kinds. Rama, however,
conciliating them all, said, 'This cannot be. 'The sea here is a full
hundred Yojanas in width. All the monkeys, ye heroes, will not be able to
cross it. This proposal, therefore, that ye have made, is not consonant
to reason. Besides we have not the number of boats necessary for carrying
all our troops. How, again, can one like us raise such obstacles in the
way of the merchants? Our army is very large. The foe wilt make a great
havoc if a hole is detected. Therefore, to cross the sea in boats and
rafts doth not recommend itself to me. I will, however, pray to the Ocean
for the necessary means. Foregoing food, I will lie down on the shore. He
will certainly show himself to me. If, however, he doth not show himself,
I will chastise him then by means of my great weapons that are more
blazing than fire itself and are incapable of being baffled!' Having said
these words, both Rama and Lakshmana touched water[96] and duly laid
themselves down on a bed of kusa grass on the seashore. The divine and
illustrious Ocean then that lord of male and female rivers, surrounded by
aquatic animals, appeared unto Rama in a vision. And addressing Rama in
sweet accents, the genius of the Ocean, surrounded by countless mines of
gems, said, 'O son of Kausalya, tell me what aid, O bull among men, I am
to render thee! I also have sprung from the race of Ikshwaku[97] and am,
therefore, a relative of thine!' Rama replied unto him, saying, 'O lord
of rivers, male and female, I desire thee to grant me a way for my
troops, passing along which I may slay the Ten-headed (Ravana), that
wretch of Pulastya's race! If thou dost not grant the way I beg of thee,
I will then dry thee up by means of my celestial arrows inspired with
mantras!' And hearing these words of Rama, the genius of Varuna's abode,
joining his hands, answered in great affliction, 'I do not desire to put
any obstacle in thy way. I am no foe of thine! Listen, O Rama, to these
words, and having listened, do what is proper! If, at thy command, I get
a way for the passage of thy army, others then, from strength of their
bows, will command me to do the same! In thy army there is a monkey of
the name of Nala, who is a skilful mechanic. And endued with great
strength, Nala is the son of Tashtri, the divine artificer of the
Universe. And whether it is wood, or grass or stone, that he will throw
into my waters, I will support the same on my surface, and thus wilt thou
have a bridge (over which to pass)!' And having said these words, the
genius of the Ocean disappeared. And Rama awaking, called Nala unto him
and said, 'Build thou a bridge over the sea! Thou alone, I am sure, art
able to do it!' And it was by this means that the descendant of
Kakutstha's race caused a bridge to be built that was ten Yojanas in
width and a hundred Yojanas in length. And to this day that bridge is
celebrated over all the world by the name of Nala's bridge. And having
completed that bridge, Nala, of body huge as a hill, came away at the
command of Rama.
"And while Rama was on this side of the ocean, the virtuous Vibhishana,
the brother of the king of the Rakshasas accompanied by four of his
counsellors, came unto Rama. And the high-souled Rama received him with
due welcome. Sugriva, however, feared, thinking he might be a spy. The
son of Raghu, meanwhile perfectly satisfied (with Vibhishana) in
consequence of the sincerity of his exertions and the many indications of
his good conduct, worshipped him with respect. And he also installed
Vibhishana in the sovereignty of all the Rakshasas and made him his own
junior counsellor, and a friend of Lakshmana's. And it was under
Vibhishana's guidance, O king, that Rama with all his troops crossed the
great ocean by means of that bridge in course of a month. And having
crossed the ocean and arrived at Lanka, Rama caused its extensive and
numerous gardens to be devastated by his monkeys. And while Rama's troops
were there, two of Ravana's counsellors and officers, named Suka and
Sarana, who had come as spies, having assumed the shape of monkeys, were
seized by Vibhishana. And when those wanderers of the night assumed their
real Rakshasa forms, Rama showed them his troop and dismissed them
quietly. And having quartered his troops in those woods that skirted the
city, Rama then sent the monkey Angada with great wisdom as his envoy to
Ravana."
