SECTION CCLXXX
"Markandeya said, 'Meanwhile the illustrious descendant of Raghu, along
with his brother, hospitably treated by Sugriva, continued to dwell on
the breast of the Malyavat hill, beholding every day the clear blue sky.
And one night, while gazing from the mountain-top on the bright moon in
the cloudless sky surrounded by planets and stars and stellar bodies,
that slayer of foes was suddenly awakened (to a remembrance of Sita) by
the cold breezes fragrant with the perfumes of the lily, lotus and other
flowers of the same species. And virtuous Rama, dejected in spirits at
the thought of Sita's captivity in the abode of the Rakshasa, addressed
the heroic Lakshmana in the morning saying, 'Go, Lakshmana and seek in
Kishkindhya that ungrateful king off the monkeys, who understand well his
own interest and is even now indulging in dissipations, that foolish
wretch of his race whom I have installed on a throne and to whom all apes
and monkeys and bears owe allegiance, that fellow for whose sake, O
mighty-armed perpetuator of Raghu's race, Vali was slain by me with thy
help in the wood of Kishkindhya! I regard that worst of monkeys on earth
to be highly ungrateful, for, O Lakshmana, that wretch hath now forgotten
me who am sunk in such distress! I think he is unwilling to fulfil his
pledge, disregarding, from dullness of understanding, one who hath done
him such services! If thou findest him lukewarm and rolling in sensual
joys, thou must then send him, by the path Vali hath been made to follow,
to the common goal of all creatures! If, on the other hand, thou seest
that foremost of monkeys delight in our cause, then, O descendant of
Kakutstha, shouldst thou bring him hither with thee! Be quick, and delay
not!' Thus addressed by his brother, Lakshmana ever attentive to the
behests and welfare of his superiors, set out taking with him his
handsome bow with string and arrows. And reaching the gates of
Kishkindhya he entered the city unchallenged. And knowing him to be
angry, the monkey-king advanced to receive him. And with his wife,
Sugriva the king of the monkeys, with a humble heart, joyfully received
him with due honours. And the dauntless son of Sumitra then told him what
Rama had said. And having heard everything in detail, O mighty monarch,
Sugriva, the king of the monkeys with his wife and servants, joined his
hands, and cheerfully said unto Lakshmana, that elephant among men, these
words: 'I am, O Lakshmana, neither wicked, nor ungrateful, nor destitute
of virtue! Hear what efforts I have made for finding out Sita's place of
captivity! I have despatched diligent monkeys in all directions. All of
them have stipulated to return within a month. They will, O hero, search
the whole earth with her forests and hills and seas, her villages and
towns and cities and mines. Only five nights are wanting to complete that
month, and then thou wilt, with Rama, hear tidings of great joy!'
"Thus addressed by that intelligent king of the monkeys, the high-souled
Lakshmana became appeased, and he in his turn worshipped Sugriva. And
accompanied by Sugriva, he returned to Rama on the breast of the Malyavat
hill. And approaching him, Lakshmana informed him of the beginning
already made in respect of his undertaking. And soon thousands of
monkey-chiefs began to return, after having carefully searched the three
quarters of the earth, viz., the North, the East and the West. But they
that had gone towards the South did not make their appearance And they
that came back represented to Rama, saying that although they had
searched the whole earth with her belt of seas, yet they could not find
either the princess of Videha or Ravana. But that descendant of
Kakutstha's race, afflicted at heart, managed to live yet, resting his
hopes (of hearing Sita's tidings) on the great monkeys that had gone
towards the South.
"After the lapse of two months, several monkeys seeking with haste the
presence of Sugriva, addressed him, saying, 'O king, that foremost of
monkeys, the son of Pavana, as also Angada, the son of Vali, and the
other great monkeys whom thou hadst despatched to search the southern
region, have come back and are pillaging that great and excellent orchard
called Madhuvana, which was always guarded by Vali and which hath been
well-guarded by thee also after him!' Hearing of this act of liberty on
their part, Sugriva inferred the success of their mission, for it is only
servants that have been crowned with success that can act in this way.
And that intelligent and foremost of monkeys communicated his suspicions
to Rama. And Rama also, from this, guessed that the princess of Mithila
had been seen. Then Hanuman and the other monkeys, having refreshed
themselves thus, came towards their king, who was then staying with Rama
and Lakshmana. And, O Bharata, observing the gait of Hanuman and the
colour of his face, Rama was confirmed in the belief that Hanuman had
really seen Sita. Then those successful monkeys with Hanuman at their
head, duly bowed unto Rama and Lakshmana and Sugriva. And Rama then
taking up his bow and quiver, addressed those monkeys, saying, 'Have you
been successful? Will ye impart life unto me? Will ye once more enable me
to reign in Ayodhya after having slain my enemy in battle and rescued the
daughter of Janaka? With the princess of Videha unrescued, and the foe
unslain in battle, I dare not live, robbed of wife and honour!' Thus
addressed by Rama, the son of Pavana, replied unto him, saying, 'I bring
thee good news, O Rama; for Janaka's daughter hath been seen by me.
Having searched the southern region with all its hills, forests, and
mines for some time, we became very weary. At length we beheld a great
cavern. And having beheld it, we entered that cavern which extended over
many Yojanas. It was dark and deep and overgrown with trees and infested
by worms. And having gone a great way through it, we came upon sun-shine
and beheld a beautiful palace. It was, O Raghava, the abode of the Daitya
Maya. And there we beheld a female ascetic named Prabhavati engaged in
ascetic austerities. And she gave us food and drink of various kinds. And
having refreshed ourselves therewith and regained our strength, we
proceeded along the way shown by her. At last we came out of the cavern
and beheld the briny sea, and on its shores, the Sahya, the Malaya and
the great Dardura mountains. And ascending the mountains of Malaya, we
beheld before us the vast ocean.[91] And beholding it we felt sorely
grieved in mind. And dejected in spirits and afflicted with pain and
famishing with hunger, we despaired of returning with our lives. Casting
our eyes on the great ocean extending over many hundreds of Yojanas and
abounding in whales and alligators and other aquatic animals, we became
anxious and filled with grief. We then sat together, resolved to die
there of starvation. And in course of conversation we happened to talk of
the vulture Jatayu. Just then we saw a bird huge as a mountain, of
frightful form, and inspiring terror into every heart, like a second son
of Vinata.[92] And coming upon us unawares for devouring us, he said,
'Who are ye that are speaking thus of my brother Jatayu? I am his elder
brother, by name Sampati, and am the king of birds. Once upon a time, we
two, with the desire of outstripping each other, flew towards the sun. My
wings got burnt, but those of Jatayu were not. That was the last time I
saw my beloved brother Jatayu, the king of vultures! My wings burnt, I
fell down upon the top of this great mountain where I still am!' When he
finished speaking, we informed him of the death of his brother in a few
words and also of this calamity that hath befallen thee! And, O king, the
powerful Sampati heating this unpleasant news from us, was greatly
afflicted and again enquired of us, saying, 'Who is this Rama and why was
Sita carried off and how was Jatayu slain? Ye foremost of monkeys I wish
to hear everything in detail!' We then informed him of everything about
this calamity of thine and of the reason also of our vow of starvation.
That king of birds then urged us (to give up our vow) by these words of
his: 'Ravana is, indeed, known to me. Lanka is his capital. I beheld it
on the other side of the sea in a valley of the Trikuta hills! Sita must
be there. I have little doubt of this!' Hearing these words of his, we
rose up quickly and began, O chastiser of foes, to take counsel of one
another for crossing the ocean! And when none dared to cross it, I,
having recourse to my father, crossed the great ocean which is a hundred
Yojanas in width. And having slain the Rakshasis on the waters, I saw the
chaste Sita within Ravana's harem, observing ascetic austerities, eager
to behold her lord, with matted locks on head, and body besmeared with
filth, and lean, and melancholy and helpless. Recognising her as Sita by
those unusual signs, and approaching that worshipful lady while alone, I
said, 'I am, O Sita, an emissary of Rama and monkey begotten by
Pavana![93] Desirous of having a sight of thee, hither have I come
travelling through the skies! Protected by Sugriva, that monarch of all
the monkeys, the royal brothers Rama and Lakshmana are in peace! And
Rama, O lady, with Sumitra's son, hath enquired of thy welfare! And
Sugriva also, on account of his friendship (with Rama and Lakshmana)
enquireth of thy welfare. Followed by all the monkeys, thy husband will
soon be here. Confide in me, O adorable lady, I am a monkey and not a
Rakshasa!' Thus addressed by me, Sita seemed to meditate for a moment and
then replied to me, saying, 'From the words of Avindhya I know that thou
art Hanuman! O mighty-armed one, Avindhya is an old and respected
Rakshasa! He told me that Sugriva is surrounded by counsellors like thee.
Thou mayst depart now!' And with these words she gave me this jewel as a
credential. And, indeed, it was by means of this jewel that the faultless
Sita had been able to support her existence. And the daughter of Janaka
further told me as a token from her, that by thee, O tiger among men, a
blade of grass (inspired with Mantras and thus converted into a fatal
weapon) had once been shot at a crow while ye were on the breast of the
mighty hill known by the name of Chitrakuta! And this she said as
evidence of my having met her and hers being really the princess of
Videha. I then caused myself to be seized by Ravana's soldiers, and then
set fire to the city of Lanka!'"
