SECTION CCLXXXIV
"Markandeya said, "Then Prahasta, suddenly advancing up to Vibhishana and
uttering a loud yell, struck him with his mace. But though struck with
that mace of terrible force, the mighty-armed Vibhishana of great wisdom,
without wavering in the least, stood still as the mountains of Himavat.
Then Vibhishana, taking up a huge and mighty javelin furnished with a
hundred bells, inspired it with mantras and hurled it at the head of his
adversary. And by the impetuosity of that weapon rushing with the force
of the thunderbolt, Prahasta's head was severed off, and he thereupon
looked like a mighty tree broken by the wind. And beholding that wanderer
of the night, Prahasta, thus slain in battle, Dhumraksha rushed with
great impetuosity against the monkey-host. And beholding the soldiers of
Dhumraksha, looking like the clouds and endued with terrible mien,
advancing up towards them, the monkey-chief suddenly broke and fled. And
seeing those foremost of monkeys suddenly give way, that tiger among
monkeys, Hanuman, the son of Pavana, began to advance. And beholding the
son of Pavana staying still on the field of battle, the retreating
monkeys, O king, one and all quickly rallied. Then mighty and great and
fearful was the uproar that arose there in consequence of the warriors of
Rama and Ravana rushing against each other. And in that battle which
raged terribly the field soon became miry with blood. And Dhumraksha
afflicted the monkey-host with volleys of winged shafts. Then that
vanquisher of foes, Hanuman, the son of Pavana, quickly seized that
advancing leader of the Rakshasa. And the encounter that took place
between that monkey and the Rakshasa hero, is desirous of defeating the
other, was fierce and terrible, like that of Indra and Prahlada (in days
of yore). And the Rakshasa struck the monkey with his maces and spiked
clubs while the monkey struck the Rakshasa with trunks of trees unshorn
of their branches. Then Hanuman, the son of Pavana, slew in great wrath
that Rakshasa along with his charioteer and horses and broke his chariot
also into pieces. And beholding Dhumraksha, that foremost of Rakshasa,
thus slain, the monkeys, abandoning all fear, rushed against the Rakshasa
army with great valour. And slaughtered in large numbers by the
victorious and powerful monkeys, the Rakshasas became dispirited and fled
in fear to Lanka. And the surviving wreck of the Rakshasa army, having
reached the city, informed king Ravana of everything that had happened.
And hearing from them that Prahasta and that mighty archer Dhumraksha,
had both, with their armies, been slain by the powerful monkeys, Ravana
drew a deep sigh and springing up from his excellent seat, said,--the
time is come for Kumbhakarna to act.--And having said this, he awake, by
means of various loud-sounding instruments, his brother Kumbhakarna from
his deep and prolonged slumbers. And having awaked him with great
efforts, the Rakshasa king, still afflicted with anxiety, addressed the
mighty Kumbhakarna and said unto him when seated at his ease on his bed,
having perfectly recovered consciousness and self-possession, these
words, 'Thou, indeed, art happy, O Kumbhakarna, that canst enjoy profound
and undisturbed repose, unconscious of the terrible calamity that hath
overtaken us! Rama with his monkey host hath crossed the Ocean by a
bridge and disregarding us all is waging a terrible war (against us). I
have stealthily brought away his wife Sita, the daughter of Janaka. and
it is to recover her that he hath come hither, after having made a bridge
over the great Ocean. Our great kinsmen also, Prahasta and others, have
already been slain by him. And, O scourge of thy enemies, there is not
another person, save thee, that can slay Rama! Therefore, O warrior,
putting on thy armour, do thou set out this day for the purpose of
vanquishing Rama and his followers! The two younger brothers of Dushana,
viz., Vajravega and Promathin, will join thee with their forces!' And
having said this unto the mighty Kumbhakarna. the Rakshasa king gave
instructions to Vajravega and Promathin as to what they should do. And
accepting his advice, those two warlike brothers of Dushana quickly
marched out of the city, preceded by Kumbhakarna."
