SECTION CCCII
"Kunti said, 'According to thy promise, I will, O king, with concentrated
mind, serve that Brahmana. O foremost of kings, I do not say this
falsely. It is my nature to worship Brahmanas. And, as in the present
case, my doing so would be agreeable to thee, even this would be highly
conducive to my welfare. Whether that worshipful one cometh in the
evening, or in morning, or at night or even at midnight, he will have no
reason to be angry with me! O foremost of kings, to do good by serving
the twice-born ones, observing all thy commands, is what I consider to be
highly profitable to me, O best of men! Do thou, therefore, O foremost of
monarchs rely on me! That best of Brahmanas, while residing in thy house,
shall never have cause for dissatisfaction. I tell thee truly. I shall, O
king, be always attentive to that which is agreeable to this Brahmana,
and what is fraught also with good to thee. O sinless one! I know full
well that Brahmanas that are eminently virtuous, when propitiated bestow
salvation, and when displeased, are capable of bringing about destruction
upon the offender. Therefore, I shall please this foremost of Brahmanas.
Thou wilt not, O monarch, come to any grief from that best of regenerate
persons, owing to any act of mine. In consequence of the transgressions
of monarchs, Brahmanas, O foremost of kings, became the cause of evil to
them, as Chyavana had become, in consequence of the act of Sukanya. I
will, therefore, O king, with great regularity, wait upon that best of
Brahmanas according to thy instructions in that respect!' And when she
had thus spoken at length, the king embraced and cheered her, and
instructed her in detail as to what should be done by her. And the king
said, 'Thou shall, O gentle maid, act even thus, without fear, for my
good as also thy own, and for the good of thy race also, O thou of
faultless limbs!' And having said this the illustrious Kuntibhoja, who
was devoted to the Brahmanas, made over the girl Pritha to that Brahmana,
saying, 'This my daughter, O Brahmana, is of tender age and brought up in
luxury. If, therefore, she transgresses at any time, do thou not take
that to heart! Illustrious Brahmanas are never angry with old men,
children, and ascetics, even if these transgress frequently. In respect
of even a great wrong forgiveness is due from the regenerate. The
worship, therefore, O best of Brahmanas, that is offered to the best of
one's power and exertion, should be acceptable!' Hearing these words of
the monarch, the Brahmana said, 'So be it!' Thereupon, the king became
highly pleased and assigned unto him apartments that were white as swans
or the beams of the moon. And in the room intended for the sacrificial
fire, the king placed a brilliant seat especially constructed for him.
And the food and other things that were offered unto the Brahmana were of
the same excellent kind. And casting aside idleness and all sense of
self-importance, the princess addressed herself with right good will to
wait upon the Brahmana. And the chaste Kunti, endued with purity of
conduct, went thither for serving the Brahmana. And duly waiting upon
that Brahmana as if he were a very god, she gratified him highly."
