SECTION CCCV
Vaisampayana said, "Although that noble girl addressed him in various
sweet words, yet she was unable to dissuade that deity of a thousand
rays. And when she failed to dissuade the dispeller of darkness, at last
from fear of a curse, she reflected, O king, for a long time!--'How may
my innocent father, and that Brahmana also, escape the angry Surya's
curse for my sake? Although energy and asceticism are capable of
destroying sins, yet even honest persons, if they be of unripe age,
should not foolishly court them. By foolishly acting in that way I have
today been placed in a frightful situation. Indeed, I have been placed
entirely within the grasp of this deity. Ye how can I do what is sinful
by taking it on myself to surrender my person to him?'
Vaisampayana continued, afflicted with fear of a curse, and thinking much
within herself, an utter stupefaction of the senses came upon her. And
she was so confounded that she could not settle what to do. Afraid, on
the one hand, O king, of the reproach of friends if she obeyed the deity,
and, on the other, of his curse if she disobeyed him, the damsel at last,
O foremost of kings, said these words unto that god, in accents tremulous
with bashfulness, 'O god, as my father and mother and friends are still
living, this violation of duty on my part should not take place. If; O
god, I commit this unlawful act with thee, the reputation of this race
shall be sacrificed in this world on my account. If thou, however, O thou
foremost of those that impart heat, deem this to be a meritorious act, I
shall then fulfil thy desire even though my relatives may not have
bestowed me on thee! May I remain chaste after having surrendered my
person to thee! Surely, the virtue, the reputation, the fame, and the
life of every creature are established in thee!' Hearing these words of
hers, Surya replied, 'O thou of sweet smiles, neither thy father, nor thy
mother, nor any other superior of thine, is competent to give thee away!
May good betide thee, O beauteous damsel! Do thou listen to my words! It
is because a virgin desireth the company of every one, that she hath
received the appellation of Kanya, from the root kama meaning to desire.
Therefore, O thou of excellent hips and the fairest complexion, a virgin
is, by nature, free in this world. Thou shalt not, O lady, by any means,
be guilty of any sin by complying with my request. And how can I, who am
desirous of the welfare of all creatures, commit an unrighteous act? That
all men and women should be bound by no restraints, is the law of nature.
The opposite condition is the perversion of the natural state. Thou shalt
remain a virgin after having gratified me. And thy son shall also be
mighty-armed and illustrious.' Thereupon Kunti said, 'If, O dispeller of
darkness, I obtain a son from thee, may he be furnished with a coat of
mail and ear-rings, and may he be mighty-armed and endued with great
strength!' Hearing these words of hers, Surya answered, 'O gentle maiden,
thy son shall be mighty-armed and decked with ear-rings and a celestial
coat of mail. And both his ear-rings and coat of mail will be made of
Amrita, and his coat will also be invulnerable.' Kunti then said, 'If the
excellent mail and ear-rings of the son thou wilt beget on me, be,
indeed, made of Amrita, then, O god, O worshipful deity, let thy purpose
be fulfilled! May he be powerful, strong, energetic, and handsome, even
like thee, and may he also be endued with virtue!' Surya then said, 'O
princess, O excellent damsel, these ear-rings had been given to me by
Aditi. O timid lady, I will bestow them, as also this excellent mail, on
thy son!' Kunti then said, 'Very well, O worshipful one! If my son, O
lord of light, become so, I will, as thou sayest, gratify thee!'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of hers Surya said, 'So be
it!' And that ranger of the skies, that enemy of Swarbhanu, with soul
absorbed in Yoga, entered into Kunti, and touched her on the navel. At
this, that damsel, on account of Surya's energy, became stupefied. And
that reverend lady then fell down on her bed, deprived of her senses.
Surya then addressed her, saying, 'I will now depart, O thou of graceful
hips! Thou shalt bring forth a son who will become the foremost of all
wielders of weapons. At the same time thou shalt remain a virgin.'"
Vaisampayana continued, "Then, O foremost of kings, as the highly
effulgent Surya was about to depart, that girl bashfully said unto him,
'So be it!' And it was thus that the daughter of king Kuntibhoja,
importuned by Surya, had after soliciting a son from him, fallen down
stupefied on that excellent bed, like a broken creeper. And it was thus
that deity of fierce rays, stupefying her, entered into her by virtue of
Yoga power, and placed his own self within her womb. The deity, however,
did not sully her by deflowering her in the flesh. And after Surya had
gone away, that girl regained her consciousness."
