SECTION XVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus insulted by the Suta's son, that illustrious
princess, the beautiful Krishna, eagerly wishing for the destruction of
Virata's general, went to her quarters. And Drupada's daughter of dark
hue and slender waist then performed her ablutions. And washing her body
and cloths with water Krishna began to ponder weepingly on the means of
dispelling her grief. And she reflected, saying, 'What am I to do?
Whither shall I go? How can my purpose be effected?' And while she was
thinking thus, she remembered Bhima and said to herself, 'There is none
else, save Bhima, that can today accomplish the purpose on which my heart
is set!' And afflicted with great grief, the large-eyed and intelligent
Krishna possessed of powerful protectors then rose up at night, and
leaving her bed speedily proceeded towards the quarters of Bhimasena,
desirous of beholding her lord. And possessed of great intelligence, the
daughter of Drupada entered her husband's quarters, saying, 'How canst
thou sleep while that wretched commander of Virata's forces, who is my
foe, yet liveth, having perpetrated today that (foul act)?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then the chamber where Bhima slept, breathing
hard like a lion, being filled with the beauty of Drupada's daughter and
of the high-souled Bhima, blazed forth in splendour. And Krishna of sweet
smiles, finding Bhimasena in the cooking apartments, approached him with
the eagerness of a three-year old cow brought up in the woods,
approaching a powerful bull, in her first season, or of a she-crane
living by the water-side approaching her mate in the pairing season. And
the Princess of Panchala then embraced the second son of Pandu, even as a
creeper embraces a huge and mighty Sala on the banks of the Gomati. And
embracing him with her arms, Krishna of faultless features awaked him as
a lioness awaketh a sleeping lion in a trackless forest. And embracing
Bhimasena even as a she-elephant embraceth her mighty mate, the faultless
Panchali addressed him in voice sweet as the sound of a stringed
instrument emitting Gandhara note. And she said, 'Arise, arise! Why dost
thou, O Bhimasena, lie down as one dead? Surely, he that is not dead,
never suffereth a wicked wretch that hath disgraced his wife, to live.'
And awakened by the princess, Bhima of mighty arms, then rose up, and sat
upon his couch overlaid with a rich bed. And he of the Kuru race then
addressed the princess--his beloved wife, saying, 'For what purpose hast
thou come hither in such a hurry? Thy colour is gone and thou lookest
lean and pale. Tell me everything in detail. I must know the truth.
Whether it be pleasurable or painful, agreeable, or disagreeable, tell me
all. Having heard everything, I shall apply the remedy. I alone, O
Krishna, am entitled to thy confidence in all things, for it is I who
deliver thee from perils again and again! Tell me quickly what is thy
wish, and what is the purpose that is in thy view, and return thou to thy
bed before others awake.'"
