SECTION XXVIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then that grandsire of the Bharatas, Bhishma the son
of Sutanu, conversant with the Vedas, acquainted with the proprieties of
time and place, and possessing a knowledge of every duty of morality,
after the conclusion of Drona's speech, applauded the words of the
preceptor and spake unto the Bharatas for their benefit these words
consistent with virtue, expressive of his attachment to the virtuous
Yudhishthira, rarely spoken by men that are dishonest, and always meeting
with the approbation of the honest. And the words that Bhishma spake were
thoroughly impartial and worshipped by the wise. And the grandsire of the
Kurus said, 'The words that the regenerate Drona acquainted with the
truth of every affair hath uttered, are approved by me. I have no
hesitation in saying so. Endued with every auspicious mark, observant of
virtuous vows, possessed of Vedic lore, devoted to religious observances,
conversant with various sciences, obedient to the counsels of the aged,
adhering to the vow of truth, acquainted with the proprieties of time,
observant of the pledge they have given (in respect of their exile), pure
in their behaviour, ever adhering to the duties of the Kshatria order,
always obedient to Kesava, high-souled, possessed of great strength, and
ever-bearing the burthens of the wise, those heroic ones can never wither
under misfortune. Aided by their own energy, sons of Pandu who are now
leading a life of concealment in obedience to virtue, will surely never
perish. It is even this that my mind surmiseth. Therefore, O Bharata, I
am for employing the aid of honest counsel in our behaviour towards the
sons of Pandu. It would not be the policy of any wise man to cause them
to be discovered now by means of spies,[21] what we should do unto the
sons of Pandu, I shall say, reflecting with the aid of the intellect.
Know that I shall say nothing from ill will to thee. People like me
should never give such counsels to him that is dishonest, for only
counsels (like those I would give) should be offered unto them that are
honest. Counsels, however, that are evil, should under no circumstances
be offered. He, O child, that is devoted to truth and obedient to the
aged, he, indeed, that is wise, while speaking in the midst of an
assembly, should under all circumstances speak the truth, if the
acquisition of virtue be an object with him. I should, therefore, say
that I think differently from all those people here, in respect of the
abode of Yudhishthira the just in this the thirteenth year of his exile.
The ruler, O child, of the city or the province where king Yudhishthira
resides cannot have any misfortune. Charitable and liberal and humble and
modest must the people be of the country where king Yudhishthira resides.
Agreeable in speech, with passions under control, observant of truth,
cheerful, healthy, pure in conduct, and skilful in work must the people
be of the country where king Yudhishthira resides. The people of the
place, where Yudhishthira is, cannot be envious or malicious, or vain, or
proud, but must all adhere to their respective duties. Indeed, in the
place where Yudhishthira resides, Vedic hymns will be chanted all around,
sacrifices will be performed, the last full libations will always be
poured, [22] and gifts to Brahmanas will always be in profusion. There
the clouds, without doubt, pour abundant rain, and furnished with good
harvest the country will ever be without fear. There the paddy will not
be without grain, fruits will not be bereft of juice, floral garlands
will not be without fragrance, and the conversation of men will always be
full of agreeable words. There where king Yudhishthira resides, the
breezes will be delicious, the meetings of men will always be friendly,
and cause of fear there will be none. There kine will be plentiful,
without any of them being lean-fleshed or weak, and milk and curds and
butter will all be savoury and nutritious. There where king Yudhishthira
resides, every kind of corn will be full of nutrition and every edible
full of flavour. There where king Yudhishthira resides, the objects of
all the senses, viz.,--taste, touch, smell, and hearing, will be endued
with excellent attributes. There where king Yudhishthira resides, the
sights and scenes will be gladdening. And the regenerate ones of that
place will be virtuous and steady in observing their respective duties.
Indeed, in the country where the sons of Pandu may have taken up their
abode during this thirteenth year of their exile, the people will be
contented and cheerful, pure in conduct and without misery of any kind.
Devoted to gods and guests and the worship of these with their whole
soul, they will be fond of giving away, and filled with great energy,
they will all be observant of eternal virtue. There where king
Yudhishthira resides, the people, eschewing all that is evil, will be
desirous of achieving only what is good. Always observant of sacrifices
and pure vows, and hating untruth in speech, the people of the place
where king Yudhishthira may reside will always be desirous of obtaining
what is good, auspicious and beneficial. There where Yudhishthira
resides, the people will certainly be desirous of achieving what is good,
and their hearts will always incline towards virtue, and their vows being
agreeable they themselves are ever-engaged in the acquisition of
religious merit. O child, that son of Pritha in whom are intelligence and
charity, the highest tranquillity and undoubted forgiveness, modesty and
prosperity, and fame and great energy and a love for all creatures, is
incapable of being found out (now that he hath concealed himself) even by
Brahmanas, let alone ordinary persons. The wise Yudhishthira is living in
close disguise in regions whose characteristics I have described.
Regarding his excellent mode of life, I dare not say anything more.
Reflecting well upon all this, do without loss of time what thou mayst
think to be beneficial, O prince of the Kuru race, if indeed, thou hast
any faith in me.'"
