SECTION XXVII
"Vaisampayana said, "Endued with mighty energy and possessed of great
discernment, Drona then said, 'Persons like the sons of Pandu never
perish nor undergo discomfiture. Brave and skilled in every science,
intelligent and with senses under control, virtuous and grateful and
obedient to the virtuous Yudhishthira, ever following in the wake of
their eldest brother who is conversant with the conclusions of policy and
virtue and profit, who is attached to them as a father, and who strictly
adhereth to virtue and is firm in truth,--persons like them that are thus
devoted to their illustrious and royal brother, who gifted with great
intelligence, never injureth any body and who in his turn himself obeyeth
his younger brothers, never perish in this way. Why, then, should not
(Yudhishthira) the son of Pritha possessing a knowledge of policy, be
able to restore the prosperity of his brothers who are so obedient and
devoted and high-souled? It is for this that they are carefully waiting
for the arrival of their opportunity. Men such as these never perish.
This is what I see by my intellect. Do, therefore, quickly and without
loss of time, what should now be done, after proper reflection. And let
also the abode which the sons of Pandu with souls under control as
regards every purpose of life, are to occupy, be now settled. Heroic and
sinless and possessed of ascetic merit, the Pandavas are difficult to be
discovered (within the period of non-discovery). Intelligent and
possessed of every virtue, devoted to truth and versed in the principles
of policy, endued with purity and holiness, and the embodiment of
immeasurable energy, the son of Pritha is capable of consuming (his foes)
by a glance alone of his eyes. Knowing all this, do what is proper. Let
us, therefore, once more search after them, sending Brahmanas and
Charanas, ascetics crowned with success, and others of this kind who may
have a knowledge of those heroes!'"
