
SECTION LXV
(Sambhava Parva)
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Indra had a consultation with Narayana about
the latter's descent on the earth from heaven with all the gods according
to their respective parts. And, having commanded all the dwellers in
heaven, Indra returned from the abode of Narayana. And the dwellers in
heaven gradually became incarnate on earth for the destruction of the
Asuras and for the welfare of the three worlds. And then, O tiger among
kings, the celestials had their births, according as they pleased, in the
races of Brahmarshis and royal sages. And they slew the Danavas,
Rakshasas, Gandharvas and Snakes, other man-eaters, and many other
creatures. And, O bull in the Bharata race, the Danavas, Rakshasas and
Gandharvas and Snakes, could not slay the incarnate celestials even in
their infancy, so strong they were.'
"Janamejaya said, 'I desire to hear from the beginning of the births of
the gods, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras, men, Yakshas and
Rakshasas. Therefore, it behoveth thee to tell me about the births of all
creatures.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Indeed, I shall, having bowed down to the
Self-create, tell thee in detail the origin of the celestials and other
creatures. It is known that Brahman hath six spiritual sons, viz.,
Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu. And Marichi's son is
Kasyapa, and from Kasyapa have sprung these creatures. Unto Daksha (one
of the Prajapatis) were born thirteen daughters of great good fortune.
The daughters of Daksha are, O tiger among men and prince of the Bharata
race, Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kala, Danayu, Sinhika, Krodha, Pradha, Viswa,
Vinata, Kapila, Muni, and Kadru. The sons and grandsons of these, gifted
with great energy, are countless. From Aditi have sprung the twelve
Adityas who are the lords of the universe. And, O Bharata, as they are
according to their names, I shall recount them to thee. They are Dhatri,
Mitra, Aryaman, Sakra, Varuna, Ansa, Vaga, Vivaswat, Usha, Savitri,
Tvashtri, and Vishnu. The youngest, however, is superior to them all in
merit. Diti had one son called Hiranyakasipu. And the illustrious
Hiranyakasipu had five sons, all famous throughout the world. The eldest
of them all was Prahlada, the next was Sahradha; the third was Anuhrada;
and after him were Sivi and Vashkala. And, O Bharata, it is known
everywhere that Prahlada had three sons. They were Virochana, Kumbha, and
Nikumbha. And unto Virochana was born a son, Vali, of great prowess. And
the son of Vali is known to be the great Asura, Vana. And blessed with
good fortune, Vana was a follower of Rudra, and was known also by the
name of Mahakala. And Danu had forty sons, O Bharata! The eldest of them
all was Viprachitti of great fame Samvara, and Namuchi and Pauloman;
Asiloman, and Kesi and Durjaya; Ayahsiras, Aswasiras, and the powerful
Aswasanku; also Gaganamardhan, and Vegavat, and he called Ketumat;
Swarbhanu, Aswa, Aswapati, Vrishaparvan, and then Ajaka; and Aswagriva,
and Sukshama, and Tuhunda of great strength, Ekapada, and Ekachakra,
Virupaksha, Mahodara, and Nichandra, and Nikumbha, Kupata, and then
Kapata; Sarabha, and Sulabha, Surya, and then Chandramas; these in the
race of Danu are stated to be well-known. The Surya and Chandramas (the
Sun and the Moon) of the celestials are other persons, and not the sons
of Danu as mentioned above. The following ten, gifted with great strength
and vigour, were also, O king, born in the race of Danu;--Ekaksha,
Amritapa of heroic courage, Pralamva and Naraka, Vatrapi, Satrutapana,
and Satha, the great Asura; Gavishtha, and Vanayu, and the Danava called
Dirghajiva. And, O Bharata, the sons and the grandsons of these were
known to be countless. And Sinhika gave birth to Rahu, the persecutor of
the Sun and the Moon, and to three others, Suchandra, Chandrahantri, and
Chandrapramardana. And the countless progeny of Krura (krodha) were as
crooked and wicked as herself. And the tribe was wrathful, of crooked
deeds, and persecutors of their foes. And Danayu also had four sons who
were bulls among the Asuras. They were Vikshara, Vala, Vira, and Vritra
the great Asura. And the sons of Kala were all like Yama himself and
smiter of all foes. And they were of great energy, and oppressors of all
foes. And the sons of Kala were Vinasana and Krodha, and then
Krodhahantri, and Krodhasatru. And there were many others among the sons
of Kala. And Sukra, the son of a Rishi, was the chief priest of the
Asuras. And the celebrated Sukra had four sons who were priests of the
Asuras. And they were Tashtadhara and Atri, and two others of fierce
deeds. They were like the Sun himself in energy, and set their hearts on
acquiring the regions of Brahman.
"Thus hath been recited by me, as heard in the Purana, of progeny of the
gods and the Asuras, both of great strength and energy. I am incapable, O
king, of counting the descendants of these, countless as they are, are
not much known to fame.
"And the sons of Vinata were Tarkhya and Arishtanemi, and Garuda and
Aruna, and Aruni and Varuni. And Sesha or Ananta, Vasuki, Takshaka,
Kumara, and Kulika are known to be the sons of Kadru; and Bhimasena,
Ugrasena, Suparna, Varuna, Gopati, and Dhritarashtra, and Suryavarchas
the seventh, Satyavachas, Arkaparna, Prayuta, Bhima, and Chitraratha
known to fame, of great learning, and a controller of his passions, and
then Kalisiras, and, O king, Parjanya, the fourteenth in the list, Kali,
the fifteenth, and Narada, the sixteenth--these Devas and Gandharvas are
known to be the sons of Muni (Daksha's daughter as mentioned before). I
shall recount many others, O Bharata! Anavadya Manu, Vansa, Asura,
Marganapria, Anupa, Subhaga, Vasi, were the daughters brought forth by
Pradha, Siddha, and Purna, and Varhin, and Purnayus of great fame,
Brahmacharin, Ratiguna, and Suparna who was the seventh; Viswavasu,
Bhanu, and Suchandra who was the tenth, were also the sons of Pradha. All
these were celestial Gandharvas. And it is also known that this Pradha of
great fortune, through the celestial Rishi (Kasyapa, her husband),
brought forth the sacred of the Apsaras, Alamvusha, Misrakesi,
Vidyutparna, Tilottama, Aruna, Rakshita, Rambha, Manorama, Kesini,
Suvahu, Surata, Suraja, and Supria were the daughters, and Ativahu and
the celebrated Haha and Huhu, and Tumvuru were the sons--the best of
Gandharvas--of Pradha and Amrita. The Brahmanas, kine, Gandharvas, and
Apsaras, were born of Kapila as stated in the Purana.
"Thus hath been recited to thee by me the birth of all creatures duly--of
Gandharvas and Apsaras, of Snakes, Suparnas, Rudras, and Maruts; of kine
and of Brahmanas blessed with great good fortune, and of sacred deeds.
And this account (if read) extendeth the span of life, is sacred, worthy
of all praise, and giveth pleasure to the ear. It should be always heard
and recited to others, in a proper frame of mind.
"He who duly readeth this account of the birth of all high-souled
creatures in the presence of the gods and Brahmanas, obtaineth large
progeny, good fortune, and fame, and attaineth also to excellent worlds
hereafter.'"
