SECTION XX
"Draupadi said, 'Alas, on account of that desperate gambler, I am now
under Sudeshna's command, living in the palace in the guise of a
Sairindhri. And, O chastiser of foes, behold the plight of poignant woe
which I, a princess, am now in. I am living in expectation of the close
of this stated period.[14] The extreme of misery, therefore, is mine.
Success of purpose, victory, and defeat, as regards mortals, are
transitory. It is in this belief that I am living in expectation of the
return of prosperity to my husbands. Prosperity and adversity revolve
like a wheel. It is in this belief that I am living in expectation of the
return of prosperity to my husbands. That cause which bringeth on
victory, may bring defeat as well. I live in this hope. Why dost thou
not, O Bhimasena, regard me as one dead? I have heard that persons that
give may beg: that they who slay may be slain; and that they who
over-throw others may themselves be overthrown by foes. Nothing is
difficult for Destiny and none can over-ride Destiny. It is for this that
I am awaiting the return of favourable fortune. As a tank once dried, is
filled up once again, so hoping for a change for the better, I await the
return of prosperity. When one's business that hath been well-provided
for is seen to be frustrated, a truly wise person should never strive for
bringing back good fortune. Plunged as I am an sorrow, asked or unasked
by thee to explain the purpose of these words spoken by me, I shall tell
thee everything. Queen of the sons of Pandu and daughter of Drupada, who
else, save myself, would wish to live, having fallen into such a plight?
O represser of foes, the misery, therefore, that hath overtaken me, hath
really humiliated the entire Kuru race, the Panchalas, and the sons of
Pandu. Surrounded by numerous brothers and father-in-law and sons, what
other woman having such cause for joy, save myself, would be afflicted
with such woe? Surely, I must, in my childhood, have committed act highly
offensive to Dhatri through whose displeasure, O bull of the Bharata
race, I have been visited with such consequences. Mark, O son of Pandu,
the pallour that hath come over my complexion which not even a life in
the woods fraught as it was with extreme misery, could bring about. Thou,
O Pritha's son, knowest what happiness, O Bhima, was formerly mine. Even,
I, who was such have now sunk into servitude. Sorely distressed, I can
find no rest. That the mighty-armed and terrible bowman, Dhananjaya the
son of Pritha, should now live like a fire that hath been put out, maketh
me think of all this as attributable to Destiny. Surely, O son of Pritha,
it is impossible for men to understand the destinies of creatures (in
this world). I, therefore, think this downfall of yours as something that
could not be averted by forethought. Alas, she who hath you all, that
resemble Indra himself to attend to her comforts--even she, so chaste and
exalted, hath now to attend to the comforts of others, that are to her
far inferior in rank. Behold, O Pandava, my plight. It is what I do not
deserve. You are alive, yet behold this inversion of order that time hath
brought. She who had the whole Earth to the verge of the sea under her
control, is now under the control of Sudeshna and living in fear of her.
She who had dependants to walk both before and behind her, alas, now
herself walketh before and behind Sudeshna. This, O Kaunteya, is another
grief of mine that is intolerable. O, listen to it. She who had never,
save for Kunti, pounded unguents even for her own use, now, good betide
thee, poundeth sandal (for others). O Kaunteya, behold these hands of
mine which were not so before. Saying this she showed him her hands
marked with corns. And she continued, she who had never feared Kunti
herself nor thee and thy brothers, now standeth in fear before Virata as
a slave, anxious of what that king of kings may say unto her regarding
the proper preparation of the unguents, for Matsya liketh not sandal
pounded by others.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Relating her woes thus, O Bharata, unto
Bhimasena, Krishna began to weep silently, casting her eyes on Bhima. And
then, with words choked in tears, and sighing repeatedly, she addressed
Bhima in these words, powerfully stirring his heart, 'Signal, O Bhima,
must have been my offence of old unto the gods, for, unfortunate as I am.
I am yet alive, when, O Pandava, I should die.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then that slayer of hostile heroes, Vrikodara,
covering his face with those delicate hands of his wife marked with
corns, began to weep. And that mighty son of Kunti, holding the hands of
Draupadi in his, shed copious tears. And afflicted with great woe, he
spoke these words.'"
