SECTION XXI
"Bhima said, 'Fie on the might of my arms and fie on the Gandiva of
Falguni, inasmuch as thy hands, red before, now become covered with
corns. I would have caused a carnage in Virata's court but for the fact
that Kunti's son eyed me (by way of forbidding it), or like a mighty
elephant. I would, without ado, have crushed the head of Kichaka
intoxicated with the pride of sovereignty. When, O Krishna, I beheld thee
kicked by Kichaka, I conceived at that instant a wholesale slaughter of
the Matsyas. Yudhishthira, however, forbade me by a glance, and, O
beauteous lady, understanding his intention I have kept quiet. That we
have been deprived of our kingdom, that I have not yet slain the Kurus,
that I have not yet taken the heads of Suyodhana and Karna, and Suvala's
son Sakuni, and the wicked Duhsasana, these acts and omissions, O lady,
are consuming every limb of mine. The thought of those abides in my heart
like a javelin implanted in it. O thou of graceful hips, do not sacrifice
virtue, and, O noble-hearted lady, subdue thy wrath. If king Yudhishthira
hear from thee such rebukes, he will surely put an end to his life. If
also Dhananjaya and the twins hear thee speak thus, even they will
renounce life. And if these, O slender-waisted maiden, give up life. I
also shall not be able to bear my own. In olden days Sarjati's daughter,
the beautiful Sukanya, followed into the forest Chyavana of Bhrigu's
race, whose mind was under complete control, and over whom, while engaged
in ascetic meditation, the ants had built a hill. Thou mayst have heard
that Indrasena also who in beauty was like unto Narayani herself,
followed her husband aged a thousand years. Thou mayst have heard that
Janaka's daughter Sita, the princess of Videha, followed her lord while
living in dense woods. And that lady of graceful hips, Rama's beloved
wife, afflicted with calamities and persecuted by the Rakshasas, at
length regained the company of Rama. Lopamudra also, O timid one, endued
with youth and beauty, followed Agastya, renouncing all the objects of
enjoyment unattainable by men. And the intelligent and faultless Savitri
also followed the heroic Satyavan, the son of Dyumatsena, alone into the
world of Yama. Even like these chaste and beautiful ladies that I have
named, thou, O blessed girl, bloomest with every virtue. Do thou spend a
short while more that is measured by even a half month. And when the
thirteenth year is complete, thou wilt (again) become the Queen regnant
of a king.' Hearing these words, Draupadi said, 'Unable, O Bhima, to bear
my griefs, it is from grief alone that I have shed these tears. I do not
censure Yudhishthira. Nor is there any use in dwelling on the past. O
Bhima of mighty strength, come quickly forward to the work of the hour. O
Bhima, Kaikeyi, jealous of my beauty, always pains me by her endeavours
to prevent the king from taking a fancy to me. And understanding this
disposition of hers, the wicked-souled Kichaka of immoral ways constantly
solicits me himself. Angry with him for this, but then suppressing my
wrath I answer that wretch deprived of sense by lust, saying, 'O Kichaka,
protect thyself. I am the beloved queen and wife of five Gandharvas.
Those heroes in wrath will slay thee that art so rash.' Thus addressed,
Kichaka of wicked soul replied unto me, saying, 'I have not the least
fear of the Gandharvas, O Sairindhri of sweet smiles. I will slay hundred
thousand Gandharvas, encountering them in battle. Therefore, O timid one,
do thou consent.' Hearing all this, I again addressed the lust-afflicted
Suta, saying, 'Thou art no match for those illustrious Gandharvas. Of
respectable percentage and good disposition, I ever adhere to virtue and
never wish for the death of any one. It is for this that thou I vest, O
Kichaka!' At this, that wight of wicked soul burst out into a loud
laughter. And it came to pass that Kaikeyi previously urged by Kichaka,
and moved by affection for her brother, and desirous of doing him a good
turn, despatched me to him, saying 'Do thou, O Sairindhri, fetch wine
from Kichaka's quarter's!' On beholding me the Suta's son at first
addressed me in sweet words, and when that failed, he became exceedingly
enraged, and intended to use violence. Understanding the purpose of the
wicked Kichaka, I speedily rushed towards the place where the king was.
Felling me on the ground the wretch then kicked me in the very presence
of the king himself and before the eyes of Kanka and many others,
including charioteers, and royal favourites, and elephant-riders, and
citizens. I rebuked the king and Kanka again and again. The king,
however, neither prevented Kichaka, nor inflicted any chastisement on
him. The principal ally of king Virata in war, the cruel Kichaka reft of
virtue is loved by both the king and the queen. O exalted one, brave,
proud, sinful, adulterous, and engrossed in all objects of enjoyment, he
earneth immense wealth (from the king), and robs the possessions of
others even if they cry in distress. And he never walketh in the path of
virtue, nor doth he any virtuous act. Of wicked soul, and vicious
disposition, haughty and villainous, and always afflicted by the shafts
of Kama, though repulsed repeatedly, if he sees me again, he will outrage
me. I shall then surely renounce my life. Although striving to acquire
virtue (on my death) your highly meritorious acts will come to naught. Ye
that are now obeying your pledge, ye will lose your wife. By protecting,
one's wife one's offspring are protected, and by protecting one's
offspring, one's own self is protected. And it is because one begets
one's own self in one's wife that the wife is called Jaya[15] by the
wise. The husband also should be protected by the wife, thinking,--How
else will he take his birth in my womb?--I have heard it from Brahmanas
expounding the duties of the several orders that a Kshatriya hath no
other duty than subduing enemies. Alas, Kichaka kicked me in the very
presence of Yudhishthira the Just, and also of thyself, O Bhimasena of
mighty strength. It was thou, O Bhima, that didst deliver me from the
terrible Jatasura. It was thou also that with thy brothers didst vanquish
Jayadratha. Do thou now slay this wretch also who hath insulted me.
Presuming upon his being a favourite of the king, Kichaka, O Bharata,
hath enhanced my woe. Do thou, therefore, smash this lustful wight even
like an earthen pot dashed upon a stone. If, O Bharata, tomorrow's sun
sheds his rays upon him who is the source of many griefs of mine, I
shall, surely, mixing poison (with some drink), drink it up,--for I never
shall yield to Kichaka. Far better it were, O Bhima, that I should die
before thee.'
"Vaisampayana Continued, 'Having said this, Krishna, hiding her face in
Bhima's breast began to weep. And Bhima, embracing her, consoled her to
the best of his power. And having abundantly consoled that
slender-waisted daughter of Drupada by means of words fraught with grave
reason and sense, he wiped with his hands her face flooded with tears.
And thinking of Kichaka and licking with his tongue the corners of his
mouth, Bhima, filled with wrath thus spake to that distressed lady.'"
