SECTION XLI
"Uttara said, 'It hath been heard by us that a corpse is tied in this
tree. How can I, therefore, being a prince by birth, touch it with my
hands? Born in the Kshatriya order, and the son of a great king, and
always observant of mantras and vows, it is not becoming of me to touch
it. Why shouldst thou, O Vrihannala, make me a polluted and unclean
bearer of corpses, by compelling me to come in contact with a corpse?'
"Vrihannala said, 'Thou shalt, O king of kings, remain clean and
unpolluted. Do not fear, there are only bows in this tree and not
corpses. Heir to the king of the Matsyas, and born in a noble family, why
should I, O prince, make thee do such a reproachable deed?'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by Partha, Virata's son, decked in
ear-rings, alighted from the car, and climbed up that Sami tree
reluctantly. And staying on the car, Dhananjaya, that slayer of enemies,
said, unto him, 'Speedily bring thou down those bows from the top of the
tree. And cutting off their wrappings first and then the ropes with which
they were tied, the prince beheld the Gandiva there along with four other
bows. And as they were united, the splendour of those bows radiant as the
sun, began to shine with great effulgence like unto that of the planets
about the time of their rising. And beholding the forms of those bows, so
like unto sighing snakes, he become afflicted with fear and in a moment
the bristles of his body stood on their ends. And touching those large
bows of great splendour, Virata's son, O king, thus spake unto Arjuna!'"
