SECTION LVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Beholding the army of the Kurus arrayed in order of
battle, that descendant of the Kuru race, Partha, addressing Virata's
son, said, 'Do thou proceed to the spot where Kripa, the son of Saradwat,
is going by the southern side of that car whose flag is seen to bear the
device of a golden altar.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Dhananjaya, the son of
Virata urged, without a moment's delay, those steeds of silvery hue
decked in golden armour. And making them adopt, one after another, every
kind of the swifter paces, he urged those fiery steeds resembling the
moon in colour. And versed in horse-lore, Uttara, having approached the
Kuru host, turned back those steeds endued with the speed of the wind.
And skilled in guiding vehicles, the prince of Matsya, sometimes wheeling
about, and sometimes proceeding in circular mazes, and sometimes turning
to the left, began to be wilder the Kurus. And wheeling round, the
intrepid and mighty son of Virata at last approached the car of Kripa,
and stood confronting him. Then announcing his own name, Arjuna
powerfully blew that best of conchs called Devadatta, of loud blare. And
blown on the field of battle by the mighty Jishnu, the blare of that
conch was heard like the splitting of a mountain. And seeing that the
conch did not break into a hundred fragments when blown by Arjuna, the
Kurus with all their warriors began to applaud it highly. And having
reached the very heavens, that sound coming back was heard even like the
crash of the thunderbolt hurled by Maghavat on the mountain breast.
Thereupon that heroic and intrepid and mighty car-warrior, Saradwat's son
Kripa, endued with strength and prowess, waxing wroth at Arjuna, and
unable to bear that sound and eager for fight, took up his own
sea-begotten conch and blew it vehemently. And filling the three worlds
with that sound, that foremost of car-warriors took up a large bow and
twanged the bow-string powerfully. And those mighty car-warriors, equal
unto two suns, standing opposed to each other, shone like two masses of
autumnal clouds. Then Saradwat's son quickly pierced Partha, that slayer
of hostile heroes, with ten swift and whetted arrows capable of entering
into the very vitals. And Pritha's son also, on his part, drawing that
foremost of weapons, the Gandiva, celebrated over the world, shot
innumerable iron-arrows, all capable of penetrating into the very core of
the body. Thereupon Kripa, by means of whetted shafts, cut into hundreds
and thousands of fragments, those blood-drinking arrows of Partha before
they could come up. Then that mighty car-warrior, Partha also, in wrath
displaying various manoeuvres, covered all sides with a shower of arrows.
And covering the entire welkin with his shafts, that mighty warrior of
immeasurable soul, the son of Pritha, enveloped Kripa with hundred of
shafts. And sorely afflicted by those whetted arrows resembling flames of
fire, Kripa waxed wroth and quickly afflicting the high-souled Partha of
immeasurable prowess with ten thousand shafts, set up on the field of
battle a loud roar. Then the heroic Arjuna quickly pierced the four
steeds of his adversary with four fatal arrows shot from the Gandiva,
sharp and straight, and furnished with golden wings. And pierced by means
of those whetted arrows resembling flames of fire those steeds suddenly
reared themselves, and in consequence Kripa reeled off his place. And
seeing Gautama thrown off his place, the slayer of hostile heroes, the
descendant of the Kuru race, out of regard for his opponent's dignity,
ceased to discharge his shafts at him. Then regaining his proper place,
Gautama quickly pierced Savyasachin with ten arrows furnished with
feathers of the Kanka bird. Then with a crescent-shaped arrow of keen
edge, Partha cut off Kripa's bow and leathern fences. And soon Partha cut
off Kripa's coat of mail also by means of arrows capable of penetrating
the very vitals, but he did not wound his person. And divested of his
coat of mail, his body resembled that of a serpent which hath in season
cast off its slough. And as soon as his bow had been cut off by Partha,
Gautama took up another and stringed it in a trice. And strange to say,
that bow of him was also cut off by Kunti's son, by means of straight
shafts. And in this way that slayer of hostile heroes, the son of Pandu,
cut off other bows as soon as they were taken up, one after another, by
Saradwat's son. And when all his bows were thus cut off, that mighty hero
hurled, from his car, at Pandu's son, a javelin like unto the blazing
thunderbolt. Thereupon, as the gold-decked javelin came whizzing through
the air with the flash of a meteor, Arjuna cut it off by means of ten
arrows. And beholding his dart thus cut off by the intelligent Arjuna,
Kripa quickly took up another bow and almost simultaneously shot a number
of crescent-shaped arrows. Partha, however, quickly cut them into
fragments by means of ten keen-edged shafts, and endued with great
energy, the son of Pritha then, inflamed with wrath on the field of
battle, discharged three and ten arrows whetted on stone and resembling
flames of fire. And with one of these he cut off the yoke of his
adversary's car, and with four pierced his four steeds, and with the
sixth he severed the head of his antagonist's car-driver from off his
body. And with three that mighty car-warrior pierced, in that encounter,
the triple bamboo-pole of Kripa's car and with two, its wheels. And with
the twelfth arrow he cut off Kripa's flagstaff. And with the thirteenth
Falguni, who was like Indra himself as if smiling in derision, pierced
Kripa in the breast. Then with his bow cut off, his car broken, his
steeds slain, his car-driver killed, Kripa leapt down and taking up a
mace quickly hurled it at Arjuna. But that heavy and polished mace hurled
by Kripa was sent back along its course, struck by means of Arjuna's
arrows. And then the warriors (of Kripa's division), desirous of rescuing
wrathful son of Saradwat encountered Partha from all sides and covered
him with their arrows. Then the son of Virata, turning the steed to the
left began to perform circuitous evolution called Yamaka and thus
withstood all those warriors. And those illustrious bulls among men,
taking Kripa with them who had been deprived of his car, led him away
from the vicinity of Dhananiaya, the son of Kunti.'"
