SECTION LXVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having speedily recovered his wealth Virata owning a
large army entered his city with a cheerful heart, accompanied by the
four Pandavas. And having vanquished the Trigartas in battle and
recovered all the kine, that mighty monarch, along with the sons of
Pritha, looked resplendent and blazed forth in beauty. And as the brave
king, that enhancer of the joys of friends, was seated on his throne, all
his subjects headed by the Brahmanas stood before him. And worshipped by
them, the king of the Matsyas, at the head of his army, saluted the
Brahmanas and his subjects in return and dismissed them cheerfully. And
Virata, the king of the Matsyas owning a large army, enquired after
Uttara, saying, 'Where hath Uttara gone?' And the women and the maidens
of the palace and the other females living in the inner apartments
joyfully said unto him, 'Our kine having been seized by the Kurus,
Bhuminjaya incensed at this and from excess of bravery hath issued forth
alone with only Vrihannala as his second, for vanquishing the six mighty
car-warriors, Bhishma the son of Santanu, and Kripa, and Karna, and
Duryodhana, and Drona, and Drona's son who have all come with the Kuru
army.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then king Virata, hearing that his brave son
had gone forth with only one car and with Vrihannala as his car-driver,
became filled with grief, and addressing his chief counsellors, said,
'Without doubt, the Kauravas and other lords of earth, learning the
defeat of the Trigartas, will never keep their ground. Therefore, let
those of my warriors that have not been wounded by the Trigartas go out,
accompanied by a mighty force, for the protection of Uttara.' And saying
this, the king speedily despatched, for the sake of his son, horses and
elephants and cars and a large number of foot-soldiers, equipped and
decked with various kinds of weapons and ornaments. And it was thus that
Virata, the king of the Matsyas, owning a large army, quickly ordered out
a large division consisting of four kinds of troops. And having done
this, he said, 'Learn ye, without loss of time whether the prince liveth
still or not! I myself think that he who hath got a person of the neuter
sex for his car-driver is not alive.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then king Yudhishthira the just, smilingly said
unto the afflicted king Virata, 'If, O monarch, Vrihannala hath been his
charioteer, the foe will never be able to take away thy kine today.
Protected by that charioteer, thy son will be able to vanquish in battle
all the lords of earth allied with the Kurus, indeed, even the gods and
the Asuras and the Siddhas and the Yakshas together.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Meanwhile, the swift-footed messengers
despatched by Uttara, having reached Virata's city, gave tidings of the
victory. And the minister-in-chief then informed the king of everything,
viz., the great victory that had been won, the defeat of the Kurus, and
the expected arrival of Uttara. And he said, 'All the kine have been
brought back, the Kurus have been defeated, and Uttara, that slayer of
foes, is well with his car-driver.' Then Yudhishthira said, 'By good luck
it is that the kine have been recovered and the Kurus routed. I do not,
however, regard it strange that thy son should have vanquished the Kurus,
for his victory is assured that hath Vrihannala for his charioteer.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing of the victory of his son possessed of
immeasurable might, king Virata became so glad that the bristles of his
body stood erect. And having made presents of raiments unto the
messengers, he ordered his ministers, saying, 'Let the highways be
decorated with flags, and let all the gods and goddesses be worshipped
with flowery offerings. And let princes and brave warriors, and musicians
and harlots decked in ornaments, march out to receive my son. And let the
bellman, speedily riding an intoxicated elephant, proclaim my victory at
places where four roads meet. And let Uttara, too, in gorgeous attire and
surrounded by virgins and chanters of eulogies, go forth to receive my
son.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having listened to these words of the king, all
the citizens with auspicious things in hand, and many amongst them with
cymbals and trumpets and conchs, and beautiful women attired in gorgeous
robes, and reciters of auspicious and sacred hymns, accompanied by
encomiasts and minstrels, and drummers and other kinds of musicians
issued forth from the city of the mighty Virata to welcome Uttara of
immeasurable prowess. And having despatched troops and maidens and
courtezens decked in ornaments, the wise king of the Matsyas cheerfully
said these words, 'O Sairindhri, fetch the dice. And, O Kanka, let the
play commence.' The son of Pandu replied, saying, 'We have heard it said
that one whose heart is filled with joy should not play with a cunning
gambler. I do not therefore, dare gamble with thee that are so
transported with joy. I am ever desirous of doing what is for thy good.
Let the play, however, commence if it pleases thee.'
"Virata said, 'My female slaves and kine, my gold and whatsoever other
wealth I have, nothing of all this shall thou be able to protect today
even if I do not gamble.' Kanka said in reply, 'O monarch, O bestower of
honours, what business hast thou with gamble which is attended with
numerous evils? Gambling is fraught with many evils; it should,
therefore, be shunned. Thou mayst have seen or at least heard of
Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu. He lost his extensive and prosperous
kingdom and his god-like brothers at dice. For this, I am averse to
gambling. But if thou likest, O king, I will play.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'While the play was going on, Matsya said unto
the son of Pandu, 'Lo, the Kauravas that are so formidable have been
vanquished in battle by my son.' Upon this, the illustrious king
Yudhishthira said, 'Why should not he conquer that hath Vrihannala for
his charioteer?'
'Thus addressed, King Matsya became angry and said unto Pandu's son,
'Thou wretch of a Brahmana, dost thou compare one of the neuter sex with
my son! Hast thou no knowledge of what is proper and what improper for
one to say? Without doubt, thou disregardest me. Why should not my son
vanquish all those with Bhishma and Drona as their leaders? O Brahmana,
for friendship only I pardon thee this thy offence. Thou must not,
however, say so again if thou wishest to live.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'There where Bhishma and Drona and Drona's son and
the son of Vikartana and Kripa and king Duryodhana and other royal and
mighty car-warriors are assembled or there where Indra himself is
surrounded by the Maruts, what other person than Vrihannala can fight,
encountering them all! None hath been, none will be, his equal in
strength of arms! Indeed, it is Vrihannala only whose heart is filled
with joy at sight of a terrible conflict. It is he who had vanquished the
celestials and the Asuras and human beings fighting together. With such a
one for his ally, why should not thy son conquer the foe? Virata said,
'Repeatedly forbidden by me, thou dost not yet restrain thy tongue. If
there is none to punish, no one would practise virtue.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Saying this, the king inflamed with anger
forcibly struck Yudhishthira in the face with a dice, and reproached him
angrily, saying, 'Let it not occur again! And having been violently
struck, blood began to flow from his nose. But the son of Pritha held it
in his hands before it fell on the ground. And the virtuous Yudhishthira
then glanced at Draupadi who was standing by his side. Ever obedient to
the wishes of her lord, the faultless Draupadi, understanding his
meaning, and bringing a golden vessel filled with water, received the
blood that flowed from his nose. Meanwhile; Uttara, entertained with
sweet perfumes of diverse kinds and decked with floral chaplets, slowly
entered the city, received with respect by the citizens, the women, and
the people of the provinces. And approaching the gate of the palace he
sent the news of his arrival to his father. And the porter then,
approaching the king, said, 'Thy son Uttara, waiteth at the gate with
Vrihannala as his companion.' And the Matsya king, with a cheerful heart,
said unto him, 'Do thou usher both, as I am very anxious to see them.'
Then Yudhishthira, the king of t e Kurus, gently whispered unto the ears
of the warder, 'Let Uttara enter alone; Vrihannala must not come in. Such
is the vow of that hero of mighty arms that whoever causeth a wound on my
person or sheddeth my blood except in battle, shall not live. Inflamed
with rage he will never bear patiently to see me bleeding, but will slay
Virata even now with his counsellors and troops and steeds.'"
