SECTION II
"Baladeva said, 'You have all listened to the speech of him who is the
elder brother of Gada, characterised as it is by a sense of virtue and
prudence, and salutary alike to Yudhishthira and king Duryodhana. These
valiant sons of Kunti are ready to give up half their kingdom, and they
make this sacrifice for the sake of Duryodhana. The sons of
Dhritarashtra, therefore, should give up half of the kingdom, and should
rejoice and be exceedingly happy with us that the quarrel can be so
satisfactorily settled. These mighty persons having obtained the kingdom
would, no doubt, be pacified and happy, provided the opposite party
behave well. For them to be pacified will redound to the welfare of men.
And I should be well-pleased if somebody from here, with the view of
pacifying both the Kurus and the Pandavas, should undertake a journey and
ascertain what is the mind of Duryodhana and explain the views of
Yudhishthira. Let him respectfully salute Bhishma the heroic scion of
Kuru's race, and the magnanimous son of Vichitravirya, and Drona along
with his son, and Vidura and Kripa, and the king of Gandhara, along with
the Suta's son. Let him also pay his respects to all the other sons of
Dhritarashtra, to all who are renowned for strength and learning, devoted
to their proper duties, heroic, and conversant with signs of the times.
When all these persons are gathered together and when also the elderly
citizens are assembled, let him speak words full of humility and likely
to serve the interests of Yudhishthira, At all events, let them not be
provoked, for they have taken possession of the kingdom with a strong
hand. When Yudhishthira had his throne, he forgot himself by being
engaged in gambling and was dispossessed by them of his kingdom. This
valiant Kuru, this descendant of Ajamida, Yudhishthira, though not
skilled in dice and though dissuaded by all his friends, challenged the
son of the king of Gandhara, an adept at dice, to the match. There were
then at that place thousands of dice-players whom Yudhishthira could
defeat in a match. Taking however, no notice of any of them, he
challenged Suvala's son of all men to the game, and so he lost. And
although the dice constantly went against him, he would still have Sakuni
alone for his opponent. Competing with Sakuni in the play, he sustained a
crushing defeat. For this, no blame can attach to Sakuni. Let the
messenger make use of words characterised by humility, words intended to
conciliate Vichitravirya's son. The messenger may thus bring round
Dhritarashtra's son to his own views. Do not seek war with the Kurus;
address Duryodhana in only a conciliatory tone, The object may possibly
fail to be gained by war, but it may be gained by conciliation, and by
this means also it may be gained enduringly.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'While that valiant scion of Madhu's race was
even continuing his speech, the gallant son of the race of Sini suddenly
rose up and indignantly condemned the words of the former by these words
of his.'
