SECTION V
"Krishna said, 'These worlds are worthy of the chief of the Somaka tribe,
and are calculated to promote the interests of Pandu's son of
immeasurable strength. As we are desirous of adopting a politic course,
this is, no doubt, our first duty; a man acting otherwise would be a
great fool. But our relationship to both the Kurus and the Pandus is
equal, howsoever these two parties may behave with each other. Both you
and we have been invited here on the occasion of a marriage. The marriage
having now been celebrated, let us go home well-pleased. You are the
foremost of kings, both in years and learning; and here we all, no doubt
are as if your pupils. Dhritarashtra has always entertained a great
respect for you; and you are also a friend of the preceptors Drona and
Kripa. I, therefore, ask you to send a message (to the Kurus) in the
interests of the Pandavas. We all resolve even upon this that you should
send a message unto them. If that chief of the Kuru race should make
peace on equitable terms, then the brotherly feelings between the Kuras
and the Pandus will sustain no injury. If on the other hand, the son of
Dhritarashtra should wax haughty and from folly refuse to make peace,
then, having summoned others, summon us too. The holder of Gadiva then
will be fired with wrath and the dull-headed and wicked Duryodhana, with
his partisans and friends, will meet his fate.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'King Virata, then having honoured Krishna, sent him
home with his followers and relatives. And after Krishna had set out for
Dwaraka, Yudhishthira and his followers, with king Virata, began to make
preparations for war. And Virata and his relatives sent word to all the
monarchs, and king Drupada also did the same. And at the request of those
lions of the Kuru race, as also of the two kings of the Matsyas and the
Panchalas, many lords of the earth possessed of great strength, came to
the place with cheerful hearts. And when the sons of Dhritarashtra heard
that the Pandavas had collected a large army, they also assembled many
rulers of the earth. And, O king, at that time the whole land became
thronged with the rulers of the earth who were marching to espouse the
cause of either the Kurus or the Pandavas. And the land was full of
military bands composed of four kinds of forces. And from all sides the
forces began to pour in. And the goddess Earth with her mountains and
forests seemed to tremble beneath their tread. And the king of the
Panchalas, having consulted the wishes of Yudhishthira, despatched to the
Kurus his own priest, who was old both in years and understanding.'
