SECTION I
OM! HAVING BOWED down to Narayana, and Nara the most exalted of male
beings, and also to the goddess Saraswati, must the word Jaya be uttered.
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then those valiant descendants of Kuru, who belonged
to the same party (with Virata), having joyfully celebrated the nuptials
of Abhimanyu and rested themselves that night, presented themselves at
dawn, well pleased, in the court of Virata, And the chamber of the king
of the Matsya was full of riches, and variegated with choice gems and
precious stones, with seats methodically arranged, adorned with garlands,
and filled with fragrance. And those mighty monarchs of men all came to
that place, And on the seats in front sat the two kings Virata and
Drupada. And the revered and aged rulers of the earth, and Valarama and
Krishna along with their father, all sat there. And close to the king of
Panchala was seated the great hero of the race of Sini, together with the
son of Rohini. And side by side with the king of the Matsya sat Krishna
and Yudhishthira, and all the sons of king Drupada, and Bhima and Arjuna,
and the two sons of Madri, and Pradyumna and Samva, both valiant in
battle, and Abhimanyu with Virata's sons. And those princes, the sons of
Draupadi, rivalling their fathers in valour, strength, grace, and
prowess, sat upon excellent seats inlaid with gold. And when those mighty
heroes wearing shining ornaments and robes had set themselves down, that
gorgeous assembly of kings looked beautiful like the firmament spangled
with resplendent stars. And those valiant men, assembled together, having
conversed with one another upon various topics, remained for some time in
a pensive mood, with their eyes fixed upon Krishna. And at the end of
their talk, Krishna drew their attention to the affairs of the Pandavas.
And those powerful kings together listened to Krishna's speech, pregnant
and lofty. And Krishna said, It is known to you all, how this
Yudhishthira was deceitfully defeated at dice by the son of Suvala, and
how he was robbed of his kingdom and how a stipulation was made by him
concerning his exile in the forest. And capable as they were of
conquering the earth by force, the sons of Pandu remained firm in their
plighted faith. And accordingly for six and seven years these
incomparable men accomplished the cruel task imposed upon them. And this
last, the thirteenth year, was exceedingly hard for them to pass. Yet
unrecognised by any one they have passed it, as known to you, suffering
unendurable hardships of various kinds. This is known to you all. These
illustrious men have spent the thirteenth year, employed in menial
service of others. This being so, it is for you to consider what will be
for the good of both Yudhishthira and Duryodhana, and what, as regards
the Kurus and the Pandavas, will be consistent with the rules of
righteousness and, propriety and what will meet with the approbation of
all. The virtuous king Yudhishthira would not unrighteously covet even
the celestial kingdom. But righteously he would accept the rule even of a
single village. How the sons of Dhritarashtra fraudulently robbed him of
his paternal kingdom, and how he hath passed a life of unendurable
hardships, are known to all the kings assembled here. The sons of
Dhritarashtra are incapable of overcoming by strength Arjuna, the son of
Pritha. Nevertheless, king Yudhishthira and his friends have no other
desire than the good of Dhritarashtra's son. These brave sons of Kunti,
and the two sons of Madri, ask for only what they themselves, achieving
victory in battle, had won from the defeated kings. You, no doubt, know
full well how those enemies of the Pandavas--with the object of
possessing themselves of the kingdom, endeavoured by various means to
destroy them, when they were yet mere boys. So wicked and rancorous they
were. Consider, how grasping they are and how virtuous Yudhishthira is.
Consider also the relationship that exists between them. I beseech you
all to consult together and also think separately. The Pandavas have
always had a regard for truth. They have fulfilled their promise to the
very letter. If now treated wrongfully by the sons of Dhritarashtra, they
would slay them all though banded together. They have friends, who, on
being informed of their unworthy treatment at the hands of others, would
stand by them, engaged in fight with their persecutors, and willingly
slay them even if they should lose their own lives for it. If you suppose
them to be too few to be capable of winning a victory over their enemies,
you must know that united together and followed by their friends, they
would, no doubt, try their utmost to destroy those enemies. What
Duryodhana thinks is not exactly known, nor what he may do. When the mind
of the other side is not known, what opinion can be formed by you as to
what is best to be done? Therefore, let a person, virtuous and honest and
of respectable birth, and wary,--an able ambassador, set out to beseech
them mildly for inducing them to give half the kingdom to Yudhishthira.
Having listened to the speech of Krishna, marked by prudence and a regard
for virtue and showing a pacific and impartial spirit, his elder brother
then addressed the assembly bestowing high encomiums on the words of the
younger brother.'"
