SECTION IV
"Drupada said, 'O mighty-armed one, it will, without doubt, be even as
thou hast said! Never will Duryodhana give up the kingdom by peaceful
means, and Dhritarashtra, who dotes on his son, will follow him in his
wish. And so will Bhishma and Drona from imbecility, and Karna and Sakuni
from folly. The words of Valadeva command themselves to my judgment; the
course pointed out by him should, indeed, be followed by a man who
desires peaceful settlement. But Duryodhana should never be addressed in
mild words. Vicious by nature, he, I believe cannot be brought to reason
by mildness. In respect of an ass, mildness is in place; but in respect
of animals of the bovine species, severity should be resorted to. If any
one were to speak mild words to Duryodhana, vicious by nature that wicked
wight would consider the speaker to be an imbecile person. If a mild
course is adopted towards him, the fool will think that he has won. Let
us do even this, let us make preparations; let us send word to our
friends that they may collect an army for us. Let speedy messengers go to
Salya, and Dhrishtaketu, and Jayatsena, and the prince of the Kekayas.
Duryodhana also, on his part, will send word to all the kings,
Rightminded persons, however, respond to the request of those that first
beseech them. Therefore, I ask you to make haste in first preferring your
suit to these rulers of men. Meseems that a great undertaking is awaiting
us. Quickly send word to Salya, and to the kings under him, and to king
Bhagadatta of immeasurable valour residing on the eastern sea-coast, and
to fierce Hardikya, and Ahuka, and the king of the Mallas of powerful
understanding, and Rochamana. Let Vrihanta be summoned and king
Senavindu, and Vahlika and Mudjakesa and the ruler of the Chedis, and
Suparsva, Suvahu; and that great hero, Paurava; and also the kings of the
Sakas, the Pahlavas, and the Daradas, and Surari, and Nadija, and king
Karnavest, and Nila, and the valiant king Viradharman; and Durjaya, and
Dantavakra, and Rukmi, and Janamejaya; and Ashada and Vayuvega, and king
Purvapali; and Bhuritejas, and Devaka, and Ekalaya with his sons; and
also the kings of the Krausha race, and the valiant Kshemamurti, and the
kings of the Kamboja and the Richika tribes, and of the western
sea-coast; and Jayatsena and the king of Kashi, and the rulers of the
land of the five rivers, and the proud son of Kratha, and the rulers of
the mountain regions, and Janaki, and Susarman and Maniman, and
Potimatsyaka, and the valiant Dhrishtaketu, and the ruler of the kingdom
of Pansu; and Paundra, and Dandadhara, and the brave Vrihatsena; and
Aparajita, and Nishada and Srenimat and Vasumat; and Vrihadvala of great
strength, and Vahu the conqueror of hostile cities; and the warlike king
Samudrasena with his son; and Uddhava, and Kshemaka and king Vatadhana;
and Srutayus, and Dridhayus, and the gallant son of Salwa; and the king
of the Kalingas, and Kumara, unconquerable in battle. Speedily send word
to these. This is what recommends itself to me. And let this my priest,
learned Brahmana, be sent, O king, to Dhritarashtra. Tell him the words
he is to say and what Duryodhana should be told; and how Bhishma is to be
addressed, and how Drona, that best of car-warriors!"
