SECTION XI
"Salya said, 'Then all the Rishis and the superior gods said, "Let the
handsome Nahusha be crowned as king of the gods. He is powerful and
renowned, and devoted to virtue ever more.' And they all went and said to
him, 'O lord of the earth, be thou our king.' And Nahusha intent on his
welfare, spoke to those gods and saints accompanied by the progenitors
(of mankind), 'I am feeble; I am not capable of protecting you; it is a
powerful person who should be your king; it is Indra who hath always been
possessed of strength.' And all the gods, led by the saints, spoke again
to him, 'Aided by the virtue of our austerities, rule thou the kingdom of
heaven. There is no doubt that we have all our respective fears. Be
crowned, O lord of monarchs, as the king of heaven. Whatever being may
stand within thy sight, whether he be a god, an Asura, a Yaksha, a saint,
a Pitri, or a Gandharva, thou shalt absorb his power and (thereby) wax
strong. Always placing virtue before (all other things), be thou the
ruler of the worlds. Protect also the Brahmarsis (Brahmana saints) and
the gods in heaven.' Then, O lord of monarchs, Nahusha was crowned king
in heaven. And placing virtue before (everything else), he became the
ruler of all the worlds. And though always of a virtuous disposition, yet
when he obtained that precious boon and the kingdom of heaven, Nahusha
assumed a sensual turn of mind. And when Nahusha became the king of the
gods, he surrounded himself with celestial nymphs, and with damsels of
celestial birth, and took to enjoyments of various kinds, in the Nandana
groves, on mount Kailasa, on the crest of Himavat, on Mandara. the White
hill Sahya, Mahendra and Malaya, as, also upon seas and rivers. And he
listened to various divine narratives that captivated both the ear and
the heart, and to the play of musical instruments of different sorts, and
to sweet vocal strains. And Viswavasu and Narada and bevies of celestial
nymphs and bands of Gandharvas and the six seasons in living shapes,
attended upon the king of the gods. And fragrant breezes, refreshingly
cool, blew round him. And while that wretch was thus enjoying himself, on
one occasion the goddess who was the favourite queen of Indra came in his
sight. And that vicious soul, having looked at her, said to the
courtiers, 'Why doth not this goddess, the queen of Indra, attend upon
me? I am the monarch of the gods, and also the ruler of the worlds. Let
Sachi make haste and visit me at my house.' Saddened at hearing this, the
goddess said to Vrihaspati, 'Protect me, O Brahmana, from this Nahusha. I
come to you as my refuge. You always say, O Brahmana, that I have got on
my person all the auspicious marks, being the favourite of the divine
king; that I am chaste, devoted to my lord, and destined never to become
a widow. All this about me you have said before. Let your words be made
true. O possessor of great powers, O lord, you never spoke words that
were vain. Therefore, O best of Brahmanas, this that you have said ought
to be true.' Then Vrihaspati said to the queen of Indra who was beside
herself through fear, 'What thou hast been told by me will come to be
true, be sure, O goddess. Thou shalt see Indra, the lord of the gods, who
will soon come back here. I tell thee truly, thou hast no fear from
Nahusha; I shall soon unite thee with Indra.' Now Nahusha came to hear
that Indra's queen had taken refuge with Vrihaspati, the son of Angiras.
And at this, the king became highly enraged.'
