SECTION IX
"Yudhishthira said, 'O foremost of monarchs, I wish to know how it was
that great and unparalleled misery had to be endured by the illustrious
Indra together with his queen.'
"Salya said, 'Listen, O king, to me as I relate this ancient story of the
events of former days,--how, O descendant of Bharata, misery befell Indra
and his wife. Once Twashtri, the lord of creatures and the foremost of
celestials, was engaged in practising rigid austerities. And it is said
that from antipathy to Indra he created a son having three heads. And
that being of universal form possessed of great lustre hankered after
Indra's seat. And possessed of those three awful faces resembling the
sun, the moon, and the fire, he read the Vedas with one mouth, drank wine
with another, and looked with the third as if he would absorb all the
cardinal points. And given to the practice of austerities, and mild being
and self-controlled, he was intent upon a life of religious practices and
austerities. And his practice of austerities, O subduer of foes, was
rigid and terrible and of an exceedingly severe character. And beholding
the austerities, courage, and truthfulness of this one possessed of
immeasurable energy, Indra became anxious, fearing lest that being should
take his place. And Indra reflected, 'How may he be made to addict
himself to sensual enjoyments; how may he be made to cease his practice
of such rigid austerities? For were the three-headed being to wax strong,
he would absorb the whole universe.' And it was thus that Indra pondered
in his mind; and, O best of Bharata's race, endued with intelligence, he
ordered the celestial nymphs to tempt the son of Twashtri. And he
commanded them, saying, 'Be quick, and go without delay, and so tempt him
that the three-headed being may plunge himself into sensual enjoyment to
the utmost extent. Furnished with captivating hips, array yourselves in
voluptuous attires, and decking yourselves in charming necklaces, do ye
display gestures and blandishments of love. Endued with loveliness, do ye
tempt him and alleviate my dread. I feel restless in my heart, O lovely
damsels. Avert ye, ladies, this awful peril that hangs over me. Good
betide you.'
"Then the nymphs said, 'O Indra, O slayer of Vala, we shall so endeavour
to allure him that thou wilt have nothing to fear at his hands. That very
receptacle of austerities, sitting now as if scorching everything with
his eyes, O god, we are going together to tempt. We shall try to bring
him under our control, and to put an end to your fears.'
"Salya continued, 'Commanded by Indra, they then went to the three-headed
being. And arriving there, those lovely damsels tempted him with various
gestures of love, displaying their fine figures. But engaged in the
practice of exceedingly severe austerities, although he looked at them,
yet he was not influenced by desire. Of subdued senses he was like the
ocean, full to the brim, in gravity. And the nymphs after having tried
their best, came back to Indra. And they all with joined hands spoke to
the lord of the celestials, saying, 'O, that unapproachable being is
incapable of being disturbed by us. O highly gifted being, thou mayst do
what now may seem proper to thee.' The high-minded Indra honoured the
nymphs and then dismissed them reflecting, O Yudhishthira, solely upon
other means of destroying his foe. And endued with intelligence, he fixed
upon a contrivance for destroying the three-headed being. And he said,
'Let me today hurt my thunderbolt at him. By this means he will speedily
be killed. Even a strong person should not overlook a rising foe,
contemptible though he may be.' And thus reflecting upon the lessons
inculcated in treatises of learning, he was firmly resolved upon slaying
that being. Then Indra, enraged, hurled at the three-headed being his
thunderbolt which looked like fire and was terrible to behold, and which
inspired dread. And forcibly struck by that thunderbolt, he was slain and
fell down, as falls on the earth the loosened summit of a hill. And
beholding him slain by the thunderbolt, and lying down huge as a hill,
the chief of the celestials found no peace, and felt as if scorched by
the effulgent appearance of the dead; for though slain, he had a blazing
and effulgent appearance and looked like one alive. And, strange to say,
though lifeless, his heads seemed to be alive as they were beheld lying
low on the field. And exceedingly afraid of that lustre, Indra remained
plunged in thought. And at that time, O great king, bearing an axe on his
shoulder, a carpenter came to the forest and approached the spot where
lay that being. And Indra, the lord of Sachi, who was afraid, saw the
carpenter come there by chance. And the chastiser of Paka said unto him
immediately, 'Do this my behest. Quickly cut off this one's heads.' The
carpenter thereupon said, 'His shoulders are broad: this axe will not be
able to cut them off. Nor shall I be able to do what is condemned by
righteous persons.' And Indra said, 'Do not fear, quickly do what I say.
At my command thy axe shall equal the thunderbolt.' The carpenter said,
'Whom am I to take thee to be who hast done this frightful deed today?
This I wish to learn, tell me the exact truth.' And Indra said, 'O
carpenter, I am Indra, the chief of the gods. Let this be known to thee.
Do thou act just as I have told thee. Do not hesitate, O carpenter! The
carpenter said, 'O Indra, how is it that thou art not ashamed of this thy
inhuman act? How it is that thou hast no dread of the sin of slaying a
Brahmana, after having slain this son of a saint?' Indra said, 'I shall
afterwards perform some religious ceremony of a rigorous kind to purify
myself from this taint. This was a powerful enemy of mine whom I have
killed with my thunderbolt. Even now I am uneasy, O carpenter; I, indeed,
dread him even now. Do thou quickly cut off his heads, I shall bestow my
favour upon thee. In sacrifices, men will give thee the head of the
sacrificial beast as thy share. This is the favour I confer on thee. Do
thou quickly perform what I desire.'
"Salya said, 'Hearing this, the carpenter, at the request of the great
Indra, immediately severed the heads of the three-headed one with his
axe. And when the heads were cut off, out flew therefrom a number of
birds, viz., partridges, quails and sparrows. And from the mouth
wherewith he used to recite the Vedas and to drink the Soma-juice, came
out partridges in quick succession. And, O king, O son of Pandu, from the
mouth with which he used to look at the cardinal points as if absorbing
them all, a number of quails came forth. And from that mouth of the
three-headed being which used to drink wine, out flew a number of
sparrows and hawks. And the heads having been cut off Indra was freed
from his trepidation, and went to heaven, glad at heart. And the
carpenter also went back to his house. And the slayer of Asuras, having
killed his foe, considered his object gained. Now when the lord of
creatures, Twashtri, heard that his son had been slain by Indra, his eyes
became red with ire, and he spoke the following words, 'Since Indra hath
killed my son who had committed no offence at all, who was constantly
engaged in the practice of austerities, who was merciful, possessed of
self-control, and of subdued passions, therefore, for the destruction of
Indra, I will create Vritra. Let the worlds behold what power I possess,
and how mighty is the practice of austerities! Let that inhuman,
wicked-minded lord of the gods also witness the same!' And saying this,
that enraged one, famous for his austerities, washed his mouth with
water, made offerings on the fire, created the terrible Vritra, and spoke
to him, saying, 'O destined slayer of Indra, grow in might even from the
strength of my austere rites.' And that Asura grew in might, towering
towards the firmament, and resembling the son of fire. And he asked,
'Risen like the doomsday sun, what am I to do?' 'Kill Indra,' was the
reply. And then he departed towards the celestial regions. And next
ensued a great fight between Vritra and Indra, both fired with wrath. And
there took place a terrible combat, O best of Kuru's race. And the heroic
Vritra seized the celestial lord who had performed a hundred sacrifices.
And filled with wrath, he whirled Indra and threw him into his mouth. And
when Indra was swallowed up by Vritra, the terrified senior gods,
possessed of great might, created Jrimbhika to kill Vritra. And as Vritra
yawned and his mouth opened the slayer of the Asura, Vala contracted the
different parts of his body, and came out from within Vritra's mouth. And
thenceforth the yawn attaches itself to the living breath of animated
beings in three worlds. And the gods rejoiced at the egress of Indra. And
once again commenced the terrible fight between Vritra and Indra, both
full of ire. And it was waged for a long while, O best of Bharata's race.
And when Vritra, inspired with the mighty spirit of Twashtri and himself
endowed with strength, got the upper hand in fight, Indra turned back And
on his retreat, the gods became exceedingly distressed. And all of them
together with Indra were overpowered by the might of Twashtri. And they
all consulted with the saints, O descendant of Bharata. And they
deliberated as to what was proper to be done, and were overwhelmed with
dread. And seated on the top of the Mandara mountain, and bent on killing
Vritra, they only bethought themselves of Vishnu, the indestructible one.'
