SECTION VII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having despatched the priest to the city called
after the elephant they sent messengers to the kings of various
countries. And having sent messengers to other places, the Kuru hero
Dhananjaya, that bull among men and son of Kunti, himself set out for
Dwaraka. And after Krishna and Valadeva, the descendants of Madhu, had
both departed for Dwaraka with all the Vrishnis, the Andhakas and the
Bhojas, by hundreds, the royal son of Dhritarashtra had, by sending
secret emissaries, furnished himself with information of all the doings
of the Pandavas. And learning that Krishna was on his way, the prince
went to the city of Dwaraka by means of fine horses possessing the speed
of the wind, and taking with him a small number of troops. And on that
very day the son of Kunti and Pandu, Dhananjaya, also speedily arrived at
the beautiful city of the Anarta land. And the two scions of the Kuru
race, those tigers among men, on arriving there saw that Krishna was
asleep, and drew near him as he lay down. And as Krishna was sleeping,
Duryodhana entered the room, and sat down on a fine seat at the head of
the bed. And after him entered that wearer of the diadem the magnanimous
Arjuna. And stood at the back of the bed, bowing and joining his hands.
And when the descendant of Vrishni, Krishna awoke, he first cast his eyes
on Arjuna. And having asked them as to the safety of their journey, and
having fitly bestowed his greetings upon them, the slayer of Madhu
questioned them as to the occasion of their visit. Then Duryodhana
addressed Krishna, with a cheerful countenance, saying, It behoveth you
to lend me your help in the impending war. Arjuna and myself are both
equally your friends. And, O descendant of Madhu, you also bear the same
relationship to both of us. And today, O slayer of Madhu, I have been the
first to come to you. Right-minded persons take up the cause of him who
comes first to them. This is how the ancients acted. And, O Krishna, you
stand at the very top of all right-minded persons in the world, and are
always respected. I ask you to follow the rule of conduct observed by
rightminded men.' Thereat Krishna replied, 'That you have come first, O
king, I do not in the least doubt. But, O king, the son of Kunti,
Dhananjaya, has been first beheld by me. On account of your first
arrival, and on account of my having beheld Arjuna first, I shall, no
doubt, lend my assistance, O Suyodhana, to both. But it is said that
those who are junior in years should have the first choice. Therefore,
Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, is entitled to first choice. There is a
large body of cowherds numbering ten crores, rivalling me in strength and
known as the Narayanas, all of whom are able to fight in the thick of
battle. These soldiers, irresistible in battle, shall be sent to one of
you and I alone, resolved not to fight on the field, and laying down my
arms, will go to the other. You may, O son of Kunti, first select
whichever of these two commends itself to you. For, according to law, you
have the right to the first choice.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Krishna, Dhananjaya the son
of Kunti selected Kesava who was not to fight on the battle-field, even
Narayana himself, the slayer of foes, increate, born among men at his own
will,--the foremost of all Kshatriyas and above all the gods and the
Danavas. And Duryodhana selected for himself that entire army (composed
of the Narayanas). And, O descendant of Bharata, having obtained those
troops numbering thousands upon thousands, he was exceedingly delighted,
although he knew that Krishna was not on his side. And having secured
that army possessed of terrible prowess, Duryodhana went to the son of
Rohini of great strength, and explained to him, the object of his visit.
The descendant of Sura in reply addressed the following words to
Dhritarashtra's son, 'Thou shouldst remember, O tiger among men, all that
I said at the marriage ceremony celebrated by Vitrata. O thou delighter
of the race of Kuru, for thy sake I then contradicted Krishna and spoke
against his opinions. And again and again I alluded to the equality of
our relationship to both the parties. But Krishna did not adopt the views
I then expressed; nor can I separate myself from Krishna for even a
single moment. And seeing that I cannot act against Krishna even this is
resolution formed by me, viz., that I will fight neither for Kunti's sons
nor for you. And, O bull of the Bharatas, born as thou art in Bharata's
race that is honoured by all the kings, go and fight in accordance with
the rules of propriety.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, Duryodhana embraced that hero
wielding a plough for his weapon of battle, and although knowing that
Krishna had been taken away from his side, he yet regarded Arjuna as
already vanquished. And the royal son of Dhritarashtra then went to
Kritavarman. And Kritavarman gave him a body of troops numbering an
Akshauhini. And surrounded by that military host, terrible to behold, the
Kaurava marched forth delighting his friends. And after Duryodhana had
departed, Krishna, the Creator of the world, clad in yellow attire,
addressed Kiritin, saying, 'For what reason is it that you have selected
me who will not fight at all?'
"Thereupon Arjuna answered, 'I question not that you are able to slay
them all. I also am alone capable of slaying them, O best of men. But you
are an illustrious person in the world; and this renown will accompany
you. I also am a suitor for fame; therefore, you have been selected by
me. It hath been always my desire to have you for driving my car. I,
therefore, ask you to fulfil my desire cherished for a long time.'
"Vasudeva's son thereupon said, It beseems thee well, O Kunti's son, that
thou measurest thyself with me. I will act as thy charioteer; let thy
wish be fulfilled.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then with a glad heart, Kunti's son,
accompanied by Krishna as well as by the flower of the Dasarha race, came
back to Yudhishthira.'
