SECTION XX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Drupada's priest, having approached the Kaurava
chief, was honoured by Dhritarashtra as also by Bhishma and Vidura. And
having first told the news of the welfare of the Pandavas, he enquired
about the welfare of the Kauravas. And he spoke the following words in
the midst of all the leaders of Duryodhana's army, 'The eternal duties of
kings are known to you all. But though known, I shall yet recite them as
an introduction to what I am going to say. Both Dhritarashtra and Pandu
are known to be sons of the same father. There is no doubt that the share
of each to the paternal wealth should be equal. The sons of Dhritarashtra
obtained the paternal wealth. Why did not the sons of Pandu at all
receive their paternal portion? Ye are aware how formerly the sons of
Pandu did not receive their paternal property which was all usurped by
Dhritarashtra's sons. The latter endeavoured in various ways to remove
the sons of Pandu from their path by employment even of murderous
contrivances; but as their destined terms of life had not wholly run out,
the sons of Pandu could not be sent to the abode of Yama. Then again,
when those high-souled princes had carved out a kingdom by their own
strength, the mean-minded sons of Dhritarashtra, aided by Suvala's son,
robbed them of it by deceit. This Dhritarashtra gave his sanction even to
that act as hath been usual with him. And for thirteen years they were
then sent to sojourn in the great wilderness. In the council-hall, they
had also been subjected to indignities of various kinds, along with their
wife, valiant though they were. And great also were the sufferings that
they had to endure in the woods. Those virtuous princes had also to
endure unspeakable woes in the city of Virata,--such as are endured only
by vicious men when their souls transmigrate into the forms of inferior
beings, Ye best of Kuru's race, overlooking all these injuries of yore
they desire nothing but a peaceful settlement with the Kurus! Remembering
their behaviour, and that of Duryodhana also, the latter's friends should
entreat him to consent to peace! The heroic sons of Pandu are not eager
for war with the Kurus. They desire to get back their own share without
involving the world in ruin. If Dhritarashtra's son assigns a reason in
favour of war, that can never be a proper reason. The sons of Pandu are
more powerful. Seven Akshauhinis of troops have been collected on behalf
of Yudhishthira, all eager to fight with the Kurus, and they are now
awaiting his word of command. Others there are tigers among men, equal in
might to a thousand Akshauhinis, such as Satyaki and Bhimasena, and the
twin brothers of mighty strength. It is true that these eleven divisions
of troops are arrayed on one side, but these are balanced on the other by
the mighty-armed Dhananjaya of manifold form. And as Kiritin exceeds in
strength even all these troops together, so also doth Vasudeva's son of
great effulgence and powerful intellect. Who is there that would fight,
in view of the magnitude of the opposing force, the valour of Arjuna, and
the wisdom of Krishna? Therefore, I ask you to give back what should be
given, as dictated by morality and compact. Do not let the opportunity
pass!'"
