SECTION XXIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having beard these words of king Dhritarashtra
Sanjaya went to Upaplavya to see the Pandavas of immeasurable strength.
And having approached king Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, he made
obeisance to him first and then spoke. And the son of Gavalgana, by name
Sanjaya and by caste a Suta, cheerfully spoke unto Ajatasatru, 'How
lucky, O king, that I see you hale, attended by friends and little
inferior to the great Indra. The aged and wise king Dhritarashtra, the
son of Ambika, hath enquired about your welfare. I hope Bhimasena is
well, and that Dhananjaya, that foremost of the Pandavas, and these two
sons of Madri, are well. I hope princess Krishna also, the daughter of
Drupada, is well,--she who never swerves from the path of truth, that
lady of great energy, that wife of heroes. I hope she is well with her
sons,--she in whom are centred all your dearest joys and whose welfare
you constantly pray for.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'O Sanjaya, the son of Gavalgana, hath thy journey
here been safe? We are pleased with thy sight. I ask thee in return how
thou art. I am, O learned man, in excellent health with my younger
brothers. O Suta, after a long while do I now receive news of the aged
king of the Kurus, that descendant of Bharata. Having seen thee, O
Sanjaya, I feel as if I have seen the king himself, so pleased I am! Is
our aged grandsire Bhishma, the descendant of Kuru, endued with great
energy and the highest wisdom and always devoted to the practices of his
own order, O sire, in health? I hope he still retains all his former
habits. I hope the high-souled king Dhritarashtra, the so-n of
Vichitravirya, is in health with his sons. I hope the great king Vahlika,
the son of Pratipa, endued with great learning, is also in health. I
hope, O sire, that Somadatta is in health, and Bhurisravas, and
Satyasandha, and Sala, and Drona with his son, and the Brahmana Kripa are
also well. I hope all those mighty bowmen are free from disease. O
Sanjaya, all those greatest and best of bowmen, endued with the highest
intelligence and versed in letters, and occupying the very top of those
who wield weapons, have attached themselves to the Kurus. I hope those
bowmen receive their honours due. I hope they are free from disease. How
happy are they in whose kingdom dwells the mighty and handsome bowman,
the well-behaved son of Drona! I hope Yuyutsu, the highly intelligent son
of Dhritarashtra by his Vaisya wife is in health. I hope, O sire, the
adviser Karna, whose counsels are followed by the dull-headed Suyodhana,
is in health. I hope, the aged ladies, the mothers of the Bharata race,
and the kitchen-maidens, the bond-maids, the daughters-in-law, the boys,
the sister's sons, and 'the sisters, and the daughters' sons of
Dhritarashtra's house are all free from trouble. O sire, I hope the king
still allows their former subsistence to the Brahmanas. I hope, O
Sanjaya, Dhritarashtra's son hath not seized those gifts to the Brahmanas
that I made. I hope Dhritarashtra with his sons meets in a spirit of
forbearance any over-bearing conduct on the part of the Brahmanas. I hope
he never neglects to make provision for them, that being the sole highway
to heaven. For this is the excellent and clear light that hath been
provided by the Creator in this world of living beings. If like
dull-headed persons, the sons of Kuru do not treat the Brahmanas in a
forbearing spirit, wholesale destruction will overtake them. I hope king
Dhritarashtra and his son try to provide for the functionaries of state.
I hope there are no enemies for theirs, who, disguised as friends, are
conspiring for their ruin. O sire, I hope none of these Kurus talk of our
having committed any crimes. I hope Drona and his son and the heroic
Kripa do not talk of our having been guilty in any way. I hope all the
Kurus look up to king Dhritarashtra and his sons as the protectors of
their tribe. I hope when they see a horde of robbers, they remember the
deeds of Arjuna, the leader in all fields of battle. I hope they remember
the arrows shot from the Gandiva, which course through the air in a
straight path, impelled onwards by the stretched bow-string in contact
with the fingers of his hand, and making a noise loud as that of the
thunder. I have not seen the warrior that excels or even rivals Arjuna
who can shoot by a single effort of his hand sixty-one whetted and
keen-edged shafts furnished with excellent feathers. Do they remember
Bhima also, who, endued with great activity causeth hostile hosts arrayed
in battle to tremble in dread, like an elephant with rent temples
agitating a forest of reeds? Do they remember the mighty Sahadeva, the
son of Madri, who in Dantakura conquered the Kalingas, shooting arrows by
both the left and right hand? Do they remember Nakula, who, O Sanjaya,
was sent, under your eye, to conquer the Sivis and the Trigartas, and who
brought the western region under my power? Do they remember the disgrace
that was theirs when under evil counsels they came to the woods of
Dwaitavana on pretence of taking away their cattle? Those wicked ones
having been over-powered by their enemies were afterwards liberated by
Bhimasena and Arjuna, myself protecting the rear of Arjuna (in the fight
that ensued) and Bhima protecting the rear of the sons of Madri, and the
wielder of the Gandiva coming out unharmed from the press of battle
having made a great slaughter of the hostile host,--do they remember
that? It is not by a single good deed, O Sanjaya, that happiness can here
be attained, when by all our endeavours we are unable to win over the son
of Dhritarashtra!"
