SECTION XXV
"Yudhishthira said, 'Here are met the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and
Krishna, and Yuyudhana and Virata, O son of the Suta Gavalgana, tell us
all that Dhritarashtra hath directed thee to say.'
"Sanjaya said, 'I greet Yudhishthira, and Vrikodara and Dhananjaya, and
the two sons of Madri, and Vasudeva the descendant of Sura, and Satyaki,
and the aged ruler of the Panchalas, and Dhrishtadyumna, the son of
Prishata. Let all listen to the words I say from a desire for the welfare
of the Kurus. King Dhritarashtra, eagerly welcoming the chance of peace,
hastened the preparation of my car for this journey here. Let it be
acceptable to king Yudhishthira with his brothers and sons and relations.
Let the son of Pandu prefer peace. The sons of Pritha are endowed with
every virtue with steadiness and mildness and candour. Born in a high
family, they are humane, liberal, and loath to do any act which would
bring on shame. They know what is proper to be done. A base deed is not
befitting you, for you are so high-minded, and have such a terrible
following of troops. If you committed a sinful act, it would be a blot on
your fair name, as a drop of collyrium on a white cloth. Who could
knowingly be ever guilty of an act, which would result in universal
slaughter, which would be sinful and lead to hell,--an act consisting in
the destruction (of men), an act the result of which, whether it be
victory or defeat, is or the self-same value? Blessed are they that have
served their relative's cause. They are the true sons and friends and
relatives (of Kuru's race) who would lay down life, life which is liable
to be abused by misdeeds, in order to ensure the welfare of the Kurus. If
you, ye sons of Pritha, chastise the Kurus, by defeating and slaying all
your foes,--that subsequent life of yours would be equivalent to death,
for what, in sooth, is life after having killed all your kinsfolk? Who,
even if he were Indra himself with all the gods on his side, would be
able to defeat you who are aided by Kesava and Chekitanas, and Satyaki,
and are protected by Dhrishtadyumna's arms? Who again, O king, can defeat
in battle the Kurus who are protected by Drona and Bhishma, and
Aswatthaman, and Salya, and Kripa and Karna with a host of Kshatriya
kings? Who, without loss to himself, is able to slay the vast force
assembled by Dhritarashtra's son? Therefore it is, that I do not see any
good either in victory or in defeat. How can the sons of Pritha, like
base persons of low lineage, commit an act of unrighteousness? Therefore,
I appease, I prostrate myself before Krishna and the aged kin I g of the
Panchalas. I betake myself to you as my refuge, with joined hands, so
that both the Kurus and the Srinjayas may be benefited. It is not likely
that either Krishna or Dhananjaya will not act up to these my words.
Either of them would lay down his life, if besought (to do so).
Therefore, I say this for the success of my mission. This is the desire
of the king and his counsellor Bhishma, that there may be confirmed peace
between you (and the Kurus).'"
