SECTION XVIII
"Salya said, "Then Indra, glorified by the bands of Gandharvas and
celestial nymphs, mounted on Airavata, the king of elephants,
characterised by auspicious marks. And the illustrious Agni, and the
great saint Vrihaspati, and Yama, and Varuna, and Kuvera, the lord of
riches, accompanied him. And the lord Sakra, the slayer of Vritra, then
went to the three worlds surrounded by the gods together with the
Gandharvas and the celestial nymphs. And the performer of a hundred
sacrifices, the king of the deities, was thus united with his queen. And
he began to protect the worlds with exceeding gladness. Then the
illustrious divine saint Angiras arrived in the assembly of Indra and
worshipped him duly by reciting the hymns of the Atharva. And the great
lord Indra became satisfied and granted a boon to the Atharvangiras. And
Indra said, 'Thou wilt be known as a Rishi of the name Atharvangiras in
the Atharva Veda, and thou wilt also get a share in sacrifices.' And
having honoured Atharvangiras thus, the great lord Indra, the performer
of a hundred sacrifices, parted with him, O great king. And he honoured
all the deities and all the saints endued with wealth of asceticism. And,
O king, Indra, well-pleased, governed the people virtuously. Thus was
misery endured by Indra with his wife. And with the view of slaying his
foes, even he had to pass a period in concealment. Thou shouldst not take
it to heart that thou, O king of kings, hast suffered with Draupadi as
also with thy high-minded brothers in the great forest. O king of kings,
O descendant of Bharata, O delighter of Kuru's race, thou wilt get back
thy kingdom in the same way as Indra got his, after having killed Vritra.
The vicious Nahusha, that enemy of Brahmanas, of evil mind, was
overthrown by the curse of Agastya, and reduced to nothing for endless
years. Similarly, O slayer of foes, thy enemies, Karna and Duryodhana and
others of vicious souls will quickly be destroyed. Then, O hero, thou
wilt enjoy the whole of this earth, as far as the sea, with thy brothers
and this Draupadi. This story of the victory of Indra, equal to the Veda
in its sacred character, should be listened to by a king desirous of
victory and when his forces have been arrayed in order of battle.
Therefore, O best of victors, I am reciting it to thee for thy victory, O
Yudhishthira. High-souled persons attain prosperity when they are
glorified. O Yudhishthira, the destruction of high-souled Kshatriyas is
at hand by reason of the crimes of Duryodhana, and through the might also
of Bhima and Arjuna. He who readeth this story of Indra's victory with a
heart full of religious faith, is cleansed of his sins, attaineth a
region of bliss, and obtaineth joy both in this world and in the next. He
hath no fear of his foes; he never becometh a sonless man, never
encountereth any peril whatever, and enjoyeth long life. Everywhere
victory declareth for him, and he knoweth not what defeat is.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'O best of Bharata's race, the king, that best
of righteous men, thus encouraged by Salya, honoured him in proper form.
And Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, of powerful arms, having beard the
words of Salya, spoke to the king of the Madras the following words,
'There is no doubt that thou wilt act as the charioteer of Karna. Thou
must damp the spirits of Karna then by recounting the praises of Arjuna.'
"Salya said, 'Let it be so. I shall do just as thou tellest me. And I
shall do for thee anything else that I may be able to do.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Salya, the king of the Madras, bade
farewell to the sons of Kunti. And that handsome man then went with his
army to Duryodhana, O repressor of foes.'"
