SECTION XXX
"Sanjaya said, 'I did thee farewell, O divine ruler of men. I will now
depart, O son of Pandu. Let prosperity be thine. I hope, I have not
carried away by the feelings of my heart, given utterance to anything
offensive. I would also bid farewell to Janardana, to Bhima and Arjuna,
to the son of Madri, to Satyaki, and to Chekitana, and take my departure.
Let peace and happiness be yours. Let all the kings look at me with eyes
of affection.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Permitted by us, O Sanjaya, take your leave. Peace
to thee! O learned man, thou never thinkest ill of us. Both they and we
know thee to be a person of pure heart in the midst of all in the court
(of the Kurus). Besides, being an ambassador now, O Sanjaya, thou art
faithful, beloved by us, of agreeable speech and excellent conduct, and
well-affected towards us. Thy mind is never clouded, and even if
addressed harshly thou art never moved to wrath. O Suta, thou never
utterest harsh and cutting words, or those that are false or bitter. We
know that thy words, free from malice, are always fraught with morality
and grave import. Amongst envoys thou art the most dear to us. Beside
thee, there is another, who may come here, and that is Vidura. Formerly,
we always used to see thee. Thou art, indeed, a friend to us as dear as
Dhananjaya. Proceeding hence, O Sanjaya, with all speed, thou shouldst
wait upon those Brahmanas of pure energy and devoted to study according
to the Brahmacharya mode,--those, namely, that are devoted to the study
of the Vedas while leading lives of mendicancy, those ascetics that
habitually dwell in the woods, as also the aged ones of other classes,
should all be addressed by thee in my name, O Sanjaya, and then their
welfare should be enquired into by thee. O Suta, repairing unto the
priest of king Dhritarashtra as also unto his preceptors and Ritwijas,
thou shouldst address them and enquire after their welfare. Even amongst
them that are, though not well-born at least aged, endued with energy,
and possessed of good behaviour and strength, who remembering speak of us
and practise according to their might even the least virtue, should first
be informed of my peace, O Sanjaya, and then shouldst thou enquire after
their welfare. Thou shouldst also enquire after the welfare of those that
live in the kingdom carrying on trade, and those that live there filling
important offices of state. Our beloved preceptor Drona, who is fully
versed in morality, who is our counsellor, who had practised the
Brahmacharya vow for mastering the Vedas, who once again hath made the
science of weapons full and complete, and who is always graciously
inclined towards us, should be greeted by thee in our name. Thou shouldst
also enquire into the welfare of Aswatthaman, endued with great learning,
devoted to the study of the Vedas, leading the Brahmacharya mode of life,
possessed of great activity, and like unto a youth of the Gandharva race,
and who, besides, hath once again made the science of weapons full and
complete. Thou must also, O Sanjaya, repair to the abode of Kripa, the
son of Saradwat, that mighty car-warrior and foremost of all persons
having a knowledge of self, and repeatedly saluting him in my name touch
his feet with thy hand. Thou shouldst also, touching his feet, represent
me as hale unto that foremost of the Kurus, Bhishma, in whom are combined
bravery, and abstention from injury, and asceticism, and wisdom and good
behaviour, and Vedic learning, and great excellence, and firmness.
Saluting unto also the wise, venerable, and blind king (Dhritarashtra),
who possessed of great learning and reverential to the old, is the leader
of the Kurus. Thou shouldst also, O Sanjaya, enquire, O sire, about the
welfare of the eldest of Dhritarashtra's sons, Suyodhana, who is wicked
and ignorant and deceitful and vicious, and who now governs the entire
world. Thou shouldst also enquire about the welfare of even the wicked
Dussasana, that mighty bowman and hero among the Kurus, who is the
younger of Duryodhana and who possesses a character like that of his
elder brother. Thou shouldst, O Sanjaya, also salute the wise chief of
the Vahlikas, who always cherishes no other wish save that there should
be peace among the Bharatas. I think, thou shouldst also worship that
Somadatta who is endued with numerous excellent qualities, who is wise
and possesses a merciful heart, and who from his affection for the Kurus
always controls his anger towards them. The son of Somadatta is worthy of
the greatest reverence among the Kurus. He is my friend and is a brother
to us. A mighty bowman and the foremost of car-warriors, he is worthy in
all respects. Thou shouldst, O Sanjaya, enquire after his welfare along
with that of his friends and counsellors. Others there are of youthful
age and of consideration amongst the Kurus, who bear a relationship to us
like that of sons, grandsons, and brothers. Unto each of these thou must
speak words which thou mayst consider suitable, enquiring, O Suta, after
his welfare. Thou must also enquire about the welfare of those kings that
have been assembled by Dhritarashtra's son for fighting with the
Pandavas, viz., the Kekayas, the Vasatis, the Salwakas, the Amvashthas,
and the leading Trigartas, and of those endued with great bravery that
have come from the east, the north, the south, and the west, and of those
that have come from hilly countries, in fact, of all amongst them that
are not cruel and that lead good lives. Thou shouldst also represent unto
all those persons who ride on elephants, and horses and cars, and who
fight on foot,--that mighty host composed of honourable men,--that I am
well, and then thou must enquire about their own welfare. Thou must also
enquire about the welfare of those that serve the king in the matter of
his revenue or as his door-keepers, or as the leaders of his troops, or
as the accountants of his income and outlay, or as officers constantly
occupied in looking after other important concerns. Thou must, O sire,
also enquire about the welfare of Dhritarashtra's son by his Vaisya
wife,--that youth who is one of the best of the Kuru race,--who never
falls into error, who possesseth vast wisdom, who is endued with every
virtue, and who never cherishes a liking for this war! Thou shouldst also
ask about the welfare of Chitrasena who is unrivalled in the tricks of
dice, whose tricks are never detected by others, who plays well, who is
well-versed in the art of handling the dice, and who is unconquerable in
play but not in fight. Thou must also, O sire, enquire about the welfare
of Sakuni, the king of the Gandharas, that native of the hilly country,
who is unrivalled in deceitful games at dice, who enhances the pride of
Dhritarashtra's son, and whose understanding naturally leads to
falsehood. Thou must also enquire about the welfare of Karna, the son of
Vikartana, that hero who is ready to vanquish, alone and unassisted,
mounted on his car, the Pandavas whom no one dares assail in battle, that
Karna who is unparalleled in deluding those that are already deluded.
Thou must also enquire about the welfare of Vidura, O sire, who alone is
devoted to us, who is our instructor, who reared us, who is our father
and mother and friend, whose understanding finds obstruction in nought,
whose ken reaches far, and who is our counsellor. Thou must also salute
all the aged dames and those who are known to be possessed of merit, and
those who are like mothers to us, meeting them gathered together in one
place. Thou must tell them, O Sanjaya, these words at first,--Ye mothers
of living sons, I hope, your sons comfort themselves towards you in a
kindly, considerate, and worthy way.--Thou must then tell them that
Yudhishthira is doing well with his sons. Those ladies, O Sanjaya, who
are in the rank of our wives, thou must ask as to their welfare also
addressing them in these words,--I hope, you are well-protected. I hope,
your fair fame hath suffered no injury. I hope, you are dwelling within
your abodes blamelessly and carefully. I hope, you are comforting
yourselves towards your fathers-in-law in a kindly, praise-worthy and
considerate way. You must steadily adopt such a conduct for yourselves as
will help you to win your husband's favour! Those young ladies, O
Sanjaya, who bear a relationship to us like that of your
daughters-in-law, who have been brought from high families, who are
possessed of merit and who are mothers of children,--thou must meet them
all and tell them that Yudhishthira send his kindly greetings to them.
Thou must, O Sanjaya, embrace the daughters of your house, and must ask
them about their welfare on my behalf. Thou must tell them,--May your
husbands be kindly and agreeable; may you be agreeable to your husbands;
may you have ornaments and clothes and perfumery and cleanliness; may you
be happy and have at your command the joys of life; may your looks be
pretty and words pleasant; Thou must ask, O sire, the women of the house
as to their welfare. Thou must also represent unto the maid-servants and
man-servants there, may be of the Kurus, and also the many humpbacked and
lame ones among them, that I am doing well, and thou must then ask them
about their welfare. Thou must tell them,--I hope, Dhritarashtra's son
still vouchsafes the same kindly treatment to you. I hope, he gives you
the comforts of life.--Thou must also represent unto those that are
defective in limb, those that are imbecile, the dwarfs to whom
Dhritarashtra gives food and raiment from motives of humanity, those that
are blind, and all those that are aged, as also to the many that have the
use only of their hands being destitute of legs, that I am doing well,
and that I ask them regarding their welfare, addressing them in the
following words,--Fear not, nor be dispirited on account of your unhappy
lives so full of sufferings; no doubt, sins must have been committed by
you in your former lives. When I shall check my foes, and delight my
friends, I shall satisfy you by gifts of food and clothes.--Thou shouldst
also, O sire, at our request, enquire after the welfare of those that are
masterless and weak, and of those that vainly strive to earn a living,
and of those that are ignorant, in fact, of all those persons that are in
pitiable circumstances. O charioteer, meeting those others, that coming
from different quarters, have sought the protection of the
Dhritarashtras, and in fact, all who deserve our greetings, thou shouldst
also enquire about their welfare and peace. Thou shouldst also enquire
about the welfare of those who have come to the Kurus of their own accord
or who have been invited, as also of all the ambassadors arrived from all
sides and then represent unto them that I am well. As regards the
warriors that have been obtained by Dhritarashtra's son, there are none
equal to them on earth. Virtue, however, is eternal, and virtue is my
power for the destruction of my enemies. Thou shouldst, O Sanjaya, also
represent unto Suyodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, the following,--That
desire of thine which torments thy heart, viz., the desire of ruling the
Kurus without a rival, is very unreasonable. It had no justification. As
for ourselves, we will never act in such a way as to do anything that may
be disagreeable to thee! O foremost of heroes anwng the Bharatas, either
give me lack my own Indraprastha or fight with me!'"
