SECTION XXXVI
"Vidura said, 'In this connection is cited the old story of the discourse
between the son of Atri and the deities called Sadhyas is as heard by us.
In days of old, the deities known by the name of Sadhyas questioned the
highly wise and great Rishi of rigid vows (the son of Atri), while the
latter was wandering in the guise of one depending on eleemosynary
charity for livelihood. The Sadhyas said, 'We are, O great Rishi, deities
known as Sadhyas. Beholding thee, we are unable to guess who thou art. It
seemeth to us, however, that thou art possessed of intelligence and
self-control in consequence of acquaintance with the scriptures. It,
therefore, behoveth thee to discourse to us in magnanimous words fraught
with learning.' The mendicant Rishi answered, 'Ye immortals, it hath been
heard by me that by untying all the knots in the heart by the aid of
tranquillity, and by mastery over all the passions, and observance of
true religion, one should regard both the agreeable and the disagreeable
like his own self. One should not return the slanders or reproaches of
others for the pain that is felt by him who beareth silently, consumeth
the slanderer; and he that beareth, succeedeth also in appropriating the
virtues of the slanderer. Indulge not in slanders and reproaches. Do not
humiliate and insult others. Quarrel not with friends. Abstain from
companionship with those that are vile and low. Be not arrogant and
ignoble in conduct. Avoid words that are harsh and fraught with anger.
Harsh words burn and scorch the very vitals, bones, heart, and the very
sources of the life of men. Therefore, he, that is virtuous, should
always abstain from harsh and angry words. That worst of men is of harsh
and wrathful speech, who pierceth the vitals of others with wordy thorns,
beareth hell in his tongue, and should ever be regarded as a dispenser of
misery to men. The man that is wise, pierced by another's wordy arrows,
sharp-pointed and smarting like fire or the sun, should, even if deeply
wounded and burning with pain, bear them patiently remembering that the
slanderer's merits become his. He that waiteth upon one that is good or
upon one that is wicked, upon one that is possessed of ascetic merit or
upon one that is a thief, soon taketh the colour from that companion of
his, like a cloth from the dye in which it is soaked. The very gods
desire his company, who, stung with reproach, returneth if not himself
nor causeth others to return it, or who being struck doth not himself
return the blow nor causeth other to do it, and who wisheth not the
slightest injury to him that injureth him. Silence, it is said, is better
than speech, if speak you must, then it is better to say the truth; if
truth is to be said, it is better to say what is agreeable; and if what
is agreeable is to be said, then it is better to say what is consistent
with morality. A man becometh exactly like him with whom he liveth, or
like him whom he regardeth, or like that which he wisheth to be. One is
freed from those things from which one abstaineth, and if one abstaineth
from everything he hath not to suffer even the least misery. Such a man
neither vanquisheth others, nor is vanquished by others. He never
injureth nor opposeth others. He is unmoved by praise or blame. He
neither grieveth nor exalteth in joy. That man is regarded as the first
of his species who wisheth for the prosperity of all and never setteth
his heart on the misery of others, who is truthful in speech, humble in
behaviour, and hath all his passions under control. That man is regarded
as a mediocre in goodness who never consoleth others by saying what is
not true; who giveth having promise; and who keepeth an eye over the
weakness of others. These, however, are the indications of a bad man,
viz., incapacity to be controlled; liability to be afflicted by dangers;
proneness to give way to wrath, ungratefulness; inability to become
another's friend, and wickedness of heart. He too is the worst of men,
who is dissatisfied with any good that may come to him from others who is
suspicious of his own self, and who driveth away from himself all his
true friends. He that desireth prosperity to himself, should wait upon
them that are good, and at times upon them that are indifferent, but
never upon them that are bad. He that is wicked, earneth wealth, it is
true, by putting forth his strength, by constant effort, by intelligence,
and by prowess, but he can never win honest fame, nor can he acquire the
virtues and manners of high families (in any of which he may be born).'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'The gods, they that regard both virtue and profit
without swerving from either, and they that are possessed of great
learning, express a liking for high families. I ask thee, O Vidura, this
question,--what are those families that are called high?'
"Vidura said, 'Asceticism, self-restraint, knowledge of the Vedas,
sacrifices, pure marriages, and gifts of food,--those families in which
these seven exist or are practised duly, are regarded as high. There are
high families who deviate not from the right course whose deceased
ancestors are never pained (by witnessing the wrong-doings of their
descendants), who cheerfully practise all the virtues, who desire to
enhance the pure fame of the line in which they are born, and who avoid
every kind of falsehood. Families that are high, fall down and become low
owing to the absence of sacrifices, impure marriages, abandonment of the
Vedas, and insults offered to Brahmanas. High families fall off and
become low owing to their members disregarding or speaking ill of
Brahmanas, or to the misappropriation, O Bharata, of what had been
deposited with them by others. Those families that are possessed of
members, wealth and kine, are not regarded as families if they be wanting
in good manners and conduct, while families wanting in wealth but
distinguished by manners and good conduct are regarded as such and win
great reputation. Therefore, should good manners and good conduct be
maintained with care, for, as regards wealth, it cometh or goeth. He that
is wanting in wealth is not really wanting, but he that is wanting in
manners and conduct is really in want. Those families that abound in kine
and other cattle and in the produce of the field are not really worthy of
regard and fame if they be wanting in manners and conduct. Let none in
our race be a fomenter of quarrels, none serve a king as minister, none
steal the wealth of others, none provoke intestine dissensions, none be
deceitful or false in behaviour, and none eat before serving the Rishis,
the gods, and guests. He, in our race, who slayeth Brahmanas, or
entertaineth feelings of aversion towards them, or impedeth or otherwise
injureth agriculture, doth not deserve to mix with us. Straw (for a
seat), ground (for sitting upon), water (to wash the feet and face), and,
fourthly sweet words,--these are never wanting in the houses of the good.
Virtuous men devoted to the practice of righteous acts, when desirous of
entertaining (guests), have these things ready for being offered with
reverence. As the Sandal tree, O king, though thin, is competent to bear
weights which timbers of other trees (much thicker) cannot; so they that
belong to high families are always able to bear the weight of great cares
which ordinary men cannot. He is no friend whose anger inspireth fear, or
who is to be waited upon with fear. He, however, on whom one can repose
confidence as on a father, is a true friend. Other friendships are
nominal connection. He that beareth himself as a friend, even though
unconnected by birth of blood, is a true friend, a real refuge, and a
protector. He, whose heart is unsteady, or who doth not wait upon the
aged, or who is of a restless disposition cannot make friends. Success
(in the attainment of objects) forsaketh the person whose heart is
unsteady, or who hath no control over his mind, or who is a slave of his
senses, like swans forsaking a tank whose waters have dried up. They that
are of weak minds suddenly give way to anger and are gratified without
sufficient cause; they are like clouds that are so inconstant. The very
birds of prey abstain from touching the dead bodies of those who having
been served and benefited by friends, show ingratitude to the latter.
Beest thou poor or beest thou rich, thou shouldst honour thy friends.
Until some service is asked, the sincerity or otherwise of friends cannot
be known. Sorrow killeth beauty; sorrow killeth strength; sorrow killeth
the understanding; and sorrow bringeth on disease. Grief, instead of
helping the acquisition of his object, drieth up the body, and maketh
one's foes glad. Therefore, do not yield to grief, Men repeatedly die and
are reborn; repeatedly they wither away and grow; repeatedly they ask
others for help, and they themselves are asked for help; repeatedly they
lament and are lamented. Happiness and misery, plenty and want, gain and
loss, life and death, are shared by all in due order. Therefore, he that
is self-controlled should neither exult in joy nor repine in sorrow. The
six senses are always restless. Through the most predominant one amongst
them one's understanding escapeth in proportion to the strength it
assumes, like water from a pot through its holes.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'King Yudhishthira who is like a flame of fire, has
been deceived by me. He will surely exterminate in battle all my wicked
sons. Everything, therefore, seems to me to be fraught with danger, and
my mind is full of anxiety, O thou of great intelligence, tell me such
words as may dispel my anxiety.'
"Vidura said, 'O sinless one, in nothing else than knowledge and
asceticism, in nothing else than restraining the senses, in nothing else
than complete abandonment of avarice, do I see thy good. Fear is
dispelled by self-knowledge; by asceticism one winneth what is great and
valuable; by waiting upon superiors learning is acquired; and peace is
gained by self-restraint. They that desire salvation without having
acquired the merit attainable by gifts, or that which is attainable by
practising the ritual of the Vedas, do not sojourn through life, freed
from anger and aversion. The happiness that may be derived from a
judicious course of study, from a battle fought virtuously, from ascetic
austerities performed rigidly, always increaseth at the end. They that
are no longer in peace with their relatives, obtain no steep even if they
have recourse to well-made beds; nor do they, O king, derive any plea.
sure from women, or the laudatory hymns of bards and eulogists. Such
persons can never practise virtue. Happiness can never be theirs, in this
world. Honours can never be theirs, and peace hath no charm for them.
Counsels that are for their benefit please them not. They never acquire
what they have not, nor succeed in retaining what they have, O king,
there is no other end for such men save destruction. As milk is possible
in kine, asceticism in Brahmanas, and inconstancy in women, so fear is
possible from relatives. Numerous thin threads of equal length, collected
together, are competent to bear, from the strength of numbers, the
constant rolling of the shuttle-cock over them. The case is even so with
relatives that are good, O bull of the Bharata race, separated from one
another, burning brands produce only smoke; but brought together they
blaze forth into a powerful flame. The case is even so, O Dhritarashtra,
with relatives. They, O Dhritarashtra, who tyrannise over Brahmanas,
women, relatives, and kine, soon fall off their stalks, like fruits that
are ripe. And the tree that stands singly, though gigantic and strong and
deep-rooted, hath its trunk soon smashed and twisted by a mighty wind.
Those trees, however, that grow in close compact are competent owing to
mutual dependence to resist winds more violent still. Thus he that is
single, however, endowed with all the virtues, is regarded by foes as
capable of being vanquished like an isolated tree by the wind. Relatives,
again, in consequence of mutual dependence and mutual aid, grow together,
like lotus-stalks in a lake. These must never be slain, viz., Brahmanas,
kine, relatives, children, women, those whose food is eaten, and those
also that yield by asking for protection. O king, without wealth no good
quality can show itself in a person. If, however, thou art in health,
thou canst achieve thy good, for he is dead who is unhealthy and ill. O
king, anger is a kind of bitter, pungent, acrid, and hot drink, painful
in its consequences: it is a kind of headache not born of any physical
illness, and they that are unwise can never digest it. Do thou, O king,
swallow it up and obtain peace. They that are tortured by disease have no
liking for enjoyments, nor do they desire any happiness from wealth. The
sick, however, filled with sorrow, know not what happiness is or what the
enjoyments of wealth are. Beholding Draupadi won at dice, I told thee
before, O king, these words,--They that are honest avoid deceit in play.
Therefore, stop Duryodhana! Thou didst not, however, act according to my
words. That is not strength which is opposed to softness. On the other
hand, strength mixed with softness constitutes true policy which should
ever be pursued. That prosperity which is dependent on crookedness alone
is destined to be destroyed. That prosperity, however, which depends on
both strength and softness, descends to sons and grandsons in tact. Let,
therefore, thy sons cherish the Pandavas, and the Pandavas also cherish
thy sons. O king, let the Kurus and the Pandavas, both having same
friends and same foes, live together in happiness and prosperity. Thou
art, today, O king, the refuge of the sons of Kuru. Indeed, the race of
Kuru, O Ajamida, is dependent on thee. O sire, preserving thy fame
unsullied, cherish thou the children of Pandu, afflicted as they are with
the sufferings of exile. O descendant of Kuru, make peace with the sons
of Pandu. Let not thy foes discover thy holes. They all, O god among men,
are devoted to truth. O king of men, withdraw Duryodhana from his evil
ways.'"
