SECTION XXIX
"Krishna said, 'I desire, O Sanjaya, that the sons of Pandu may not be
ruined; that they may prosper, and attain their wishes. Similarly, I pray
for the prosperity of king Dhritarashtra whose sons are many. For
evermore, O Sanjaya, my desire hath been that I should tell them nothing
else than that peace would be acceptable to king Dhritarashtra. I also
deem it proper for the sons of Pandu. A peaceful disposition of an
exceedingly rare character hath been displayed by Pandu's son in this
matter. When Dhritarashtra and his sons, however, are so covetous, I do
not see why hostility should not run high? Thou canst not pretend, O
Sanjaya, to be more versed than I am or Yudhishthira. is, in the niceties
of right and wrong. Then why dost thou speak words of reproach with
reference to the conduct of Yudhishthira who is enterprising, mindful of
his own duty, and thoughtful, from the very beginning, of the welfare of
his family, agreeably to the injunctions (of treatises of morality)? With
regard to the topic at hand, the Brahmanas have held opinions of various
kinds. Some say that success in the world to come depends upon work. Some
declare that action should be shunned and that salvation is attainable by
knowledge. The Brahmanas say--that though one may have a knowledge of
eatable things, yet his hunger will not be appeased unless he actually
eats. Those branches of knowledge that help the doing of work, bear
fruit, but not other kinds, for the fruit of work is of ocular
demonstration. A thirsty person drinks water, and by that act his thirst
is allayed. This result proceeds, no doubt, from work. Therein lies the
efficacy of work. If anyone thinks that something else is better than
work, I deem, his work and his words are meaningless. In the other world,
it is by virtue of work that the gods flourish. It is by work that the
wind blows. It is by virtue of work that the sleepless Surya rises every
day and becomes the cause of day and night, and Soma passes through the
months and the fortnights and the combinations of constellations. Fire is
kindled of itself and burns by virtue of work, doing good to mankind. The
sleepless goddess Earth, sustains by force this very great burden. The
sleepless rivers, giving satisfaction to all (organised) beings, carry
their waters with speed. The sleepless Indra, possessed of a mighty
force, pours down rain, resounding the heaven and the cardinal points.
Desirous of being the greatest of the gods, he led a life of austerities
such as a holy Brahmana leads. Indra gave up pleasure, and all things
agreeable to the heart. He sedulously cherished virtue and truth and
self-control, and forbearance, and impartiality, and humanity. It was by
work that he attained a position the highest (of all). Following the
above course of life, Indra attained the high sovereignty over the gods.
Vrihaspati, intently and with self-control, led in a proper manner that
life of austerities which a Brahmana leads. He gave up pleasure and
controlled his senses and thereby attained the position of the preceptor
of the celestials. Similarly, the constellations in the other world, by
virtue of work, and the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, king Yama, and
Kuvera, and the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, and the celestial nymphs, all
attained their present position by work. In the other world, the saints
shine, following a life of study, austerity and work (combined). Knowing,
O Sanjaya, that this is the rule followed by the best of Brahmanas, and
Kshatriyas, and Vaisyas, and thou being one of the wisest men,--why art
thou making this endeavour on behalf of those sons of Kurus? Thou must
know that Yudhishthira is constantly engaged in the study of the Vedas.
He is inclined to the horse-sacrifice and the Rajasuya. Again, he rides
horses and elephants, is arrayed in armour, mounts a car, and takes up
the bow and all kinds of weapons. Now, if the sons of Pritha can see a
course of action not involving the slaughter of the sons of Kuru, they
would adopt it. Their virtue would then be saved, and an act of religious
merit also would be achieved by them, even if they would have then to
force Bhima to follow a conduct marked by humanity. On the other hand, if
in doing what their forefathers did, they should meet with death under
inevitable destiny, then in trying their utmost to discharge their duty,
such death would even be worthy of praise. Supposing thou approvest of
peace alone I should like to hear what thou mayst have to say to this
question,--which way doth the injunction of religious law lie, viz.,
whether it is proper for the king to fight or not?--Thou must, O Sanjaya,
take into thy consideration the division of the four castes, and the
scheme of respective duties allotted to each. Thou must hear that course
of action the Pandavas are going to adopt. Then mayst thou praise or
censure, just as it may please thee. A Brahmana should study, offer
sacrifices, make charities, and sojourn to the best of all holy places on
the earth; he should teach, minister as a priest in sacrifices offered by
others worthy of such help, and accept gifts from persons who are known.
Similarly, a Kshatriya should protect the people in accordance with the
injunctions of the law, diligently practise the virtue of charity, offer
sacrifices, study the whole Veda, take a wife, and lead a virtuous
householder's life. If he be possessed of a virtuous soul, and if he
practise the holy virtues, he may easily attain the religion of the
Supreme Being. A Vaisya should study and diligently earn and accumulate
wealth by means of commerce, agriculture, and the tending of cattle. He
should so act as to please the Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas, be virtuous,
do good works, and be a householder. The following are the duties
declared for a Sudra from the olden times. He should serve the Brahmanas
and submit to them; should not study; sacrifices are forbidden to him; he
should be diligent and be constantly enterprising in doing all that is
for his good. The king protects all these with (proper) care, and sets
all the castes to perform their respective duties. He should not be given
to sensual enjoyments. He should be impartial, and treat all his subjects
on an equal footing. The King should never obey the dictates of such
desires as are opposed to righteousness. If there be any body who is more
praise-worthy than he, who is well-known and gifted with all the virtues,
the king should instruct his subjects to see him. A bad (king), however,
would not understand this. Growing strong, and inhuman and becoming a
mark for destiny's wrath, he would cast covetous eye on the riches of
others. Then comes war, for which purpose came into being weapons, and
armour, and bows. Indra invented these contrivances, for putting the
plunderers to death. He also contrived armours, and weapons, and bows.
Religious merit is acquired by putting the robbers to death. Many awful
evils have manifested themselves on account of the Kurus having been
unrighteous, and unmindful of law and religion. This is not right, O
Sanjaya. Now, king Dhritarashtra with his sons, hath unreasonably seized
what lawfully belonged to Pandu's son. He minds not the immemorial law
observable by kings. All the Kurus are following in the wake. A thief who
steals wealth unseen and one who forcibly seizes the same, in open
day-light, are both to be condemned, O Sanjaya. What is the difference
between them and Dhritarashtra's sons? From avarice he regards that to be
righteous which he intends to do, following the dictates of his wrath.
The shares of the Pandavas is, no doubt, fixed. Why should that share of
theirs be seized by that fool? This being the state of things, it would
be praiseworthy for us to be even killed in fight. A paternal kingdom is
preferable to sovereignty received from a stranger. These time-honoured
rules of law, O Sanjaya, thou must propound to the Kurus, in the midst of
the assembled kings,--I mean those dull-headed fools who have been
assembled together by Dhritarashtra's son, and who are already under the
clutches of death. Look once more at that vilest of all their acts,--the
conduct of the Kurus in the council-hall. That those Kurus, at whose head
stood Bhishma did not interfere when the beloved wife of the sons of
Pandu, daughter of Drupada, of fare fame, pure life, and conduct worthy
of praise, was seized, while weeping, by that slave of lust. The Kurus
all, including young and old, were present there. If they had then
prevented that indignity offered to her, then I should have been pleased
with Dhritarashtra's behaviour. It would have been for the final good of
his sons also. Dussasana forcibly took Krishna into the midst of the
public hall wherein were seated her fathers-in-law. Carried there,
expecting sympathy, she found none to take her part, except Vidura. The
kings uttered not a word of protest, solely because they were a set of
imbeciles. Vidura alone spoke words of opposition, from a sense of
duty,--words conceived in righteousness addressed to that man
(Duryodhana) of little sense. Thou didst not, O Sanjaya, then say what
law and morality were, but now thou comest to instruct the son of Pandu!
Krishna, however, having repaired to the hall at that time made
everything right, for like a vessel in the sea, she rescued the Pandavas
as also herself, from that gathering ocean (of misfortunes)! Then in that
hall, while Krishna stood, the charioteer's son addressed her in the
presence of her fathers-in-law saying, 'O Daughter of Drupada thou hast
no refuge. Better betake thyself as a bond-woman to the house of
Dhritarashtra's son. Thy husbands, being defeated, no longer exist. Thou
hast a loving soul, choose some one else for thy lord.' This speech,
proceeding from Karna, was a wordy arrow, sharp, cutting all hopes,
hitting the tenderest parts of the organisation, and frightful. It buried
itself deep in Arjuna's heart. When the sons of Pandu were about to adopt
the garments made of the skins of black deer, Dussasana spoke the
following pungent words, 'These all are mean eunuchs, ruined, and damned
for a lengthened time.' And Sakuni, the king of the Gandhara land, spoke
to Yudhishthira at the time of the game of dice the following words by
way of a wily trick, 'Nakula hath been won by me from you, what else have
you got? Now you should better stake your wife Draupadi'. You know, O
Sanjaya, all these words of an approbrious kind which were spoken at the
time of the game of dice. I desire to go personally to the Kurus, in
order to settle this difficult matter. If without injury to the Pandava
cause I succeed in bringing about this peace with the Kurus, an act of
religious merit, resulting in very great blessings, will then have been
done by me; and the Kurus also will have been extricated from the meshes
of death. I hope that when I shall speak to the Kurus words of wisdom,
resting on rules of righteousness, words fraught with sense and free from
all tendency to inhumanity, Dhritarashtra's son will, in my presence, pay
heed to them. I hope that when I arrive, the Kurus will pay me due
respect. Else thou mayst rest assured that those vicious sons of
Dhritarashtra, already scorched by their own vicious acts, will be burnt
up by Arjuna and Bhima ready for battle. When Pandu's sons were defeated
(at the play), Dhritarashtra's sons spoke to them words that were harsh
and rude. But when the time will come, Bhima will, no doubt, take care to
remind Duryodhana of those words. Duryodhana is a big tree of evil
passions; Karna is its trunk; Sakuni is its branches; Dussasana forms its
abundant blossoms and fruits; (while) the wise king Dhritarashtra is its
toots. Yudhishthira is a big tree of righteousness; Arjuna is its trunk;
and Bhima is its branches; the sons of Madri are its abundant flowers and
fruits; and its roots are myself and religion and religious men. King
Dhritarashtra with his sons constitutes a forest, while, O Sanjaya, the
sons of Pandu are its tigers. Do not, oh, cut down the forest with its
tigers, and let not the tigers be driven away from the forest. The tiger,
out of the woods, is easily slain; the wood also, that is without a
tiger, is easily cut down. Therefore, it is the tiger that protects the
forest and the forest that shelters the tiger. The Dhritarashtras are as
creepers, while, O Sanjaya, the Pandavas are Sala trees. A creeper can
never flourish unless it hath a large tree to twine round. The sons of
Pritha are ready to wait upon Dhritarashtra as, indeed, those repressors
of foes are ready for war. Let king Dhritarashtra now do what may be
proper for him to do. The virtuous and the high-souled sons of Pandu,
though competent to be engaged in fight, are yet now in place (with their
cousins). O learned man, represent all this truly (to Dhritarashtra).'"
