SECTION XXXIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'King Dhritarashtra endued with great wisdom (then)
said to the orderly-in-waiting, 'I desire to see Vidura. Bring him here
without delay.' Despatched by Dhritarashtra, the messenger went to
Kshatri and said, 'O thou of great wisdom, our lord the mighty king
desireth to see thee.' Thus addressed, Vidura (set out and) coming to the
palace, spoke unto the orderly, 'Apprise Dhritarashtra of my arrival.'
Thereupon the orderly went to Dhritarashtra, and said, O, foremost of
kings, Vidura is here at thy command. He wisheth to behold thy feet.
Command me as to what he is to do.' Thereupon Dhritarashtra said, 'Let
Vidura of great wisdom and foresight enter. I am never unwilling or
unprepared to see Vidura.' The orderly then went out and spoke unto
Vidura, 'O Kshatri, enter the inner apartments of the wise king. The king
says that he is never unwilling to see thee.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having entered Dhritarashtra's chamber, Vidura
said with joined hands unto that ruler of men who was then plunged in
thought, 'O thou of great wisdom, I am Vidura, arrived here at thy
command. If there is anything to be done, here I am, command me!'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O Vidura, Sanjaya hath come back. He hath gone away
after rebuking me. Tomorrow he will deliver, in the midst of the court,
Ajatasatru's message. I have not been able today to ascertain what the
message is of the Kuru hero. Therefore, my body is burning, and that hath
produced sleeplessness. Tell us what may be good for a person that is
sleepless and burning. Thou art, O child, versed in both religion and
profit. Ever since, Sanjaya hath returned from the Pandavas, my heart
knoweth no peace. Filled with anxiety about what he may deliver, all my
senses have been disordered'.
"Vidura said, 'Sleeplessness overtaketh thief, a lustful person, him that
hath lost all his wealth, him that hath failed to achieve success, and
him also that is weak and hath been attacked by a strong person. I hope,
O king, that none of these grave calamities have overtaken thee. I hope,
thou dost not grieve, coveting the wealth of others.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'I desire to hear from thee words that are
beneficial and fraught with high morality. In this race of royal Rishis
thou alone art reverenced by the wise.' Vidura replied, 'King
(Yudhishthira), graced with every virtue, is worthy of being the
sovereign of the three worlds; yet, O Dhritarashtra, however worthy of
being kept by thy side, he was exiled by thee. Thou art, however,
possessed of qualities which are thy very reverse of those possessed by
him. Although virtuous and versed in morality, thou hast yet no right to
a share in the kingdom owing to thy loss of sight. In consequence of his
inoffensiveness and kindness, his righteousness, love of truth and
energy, and his remembering the reverence that is due to thee,
Yudhishthira patiently bears innumerable wrongs. Having bestowed on
Duryodhana and Suvala's son and Karna, and Dussasana the management of
the empire, how canst thou hope for prosperity? He that is not served
from the high ends of life by the aid of self-knowledge, exertion,
forbearance and steadiness in virtue, is called wise. These again are the
marks of a wise man, viz., adherence to acts, worthy of praise and
rejection of what is blamable, faith, and reverence. He whom neither
anger nor joy, nor pride, nor false modesty, nor stupefaction, nor
vanity, can draw away from the high ends of life, is considered as wise.
He whose intended acts, and proposed counsels remain concealed from foes,
and whose acts become known only after they have been done, is considered
wise. He whose proposed actions are never obstructed by heat or cold,
fear of attachment, prosperity or adversity, is considered wise. He whose
judgment dissociated from desire, followeth both virtue and profit, and
who disregarding pleasure chooseth such ends as are serviceable in both
worlds, is considered wise. They that exert to the best of their might,
and act also to the best of their might, and disregard nothing as
insignificant, are called wise. He that understandeth quickly, listeneth
patiently, pursueth his objects with judgment and not from desire and
spendeth not his breath on the affairs of others without being asked, is
said to possess the foremost mark of wisdom. They that do not strive for
objects that are unattainable, that do not grieve for what is lost and
gone, that do not suffer their minds to be clouded amid calamities, are
regarded to possess intellects endued with wisdom. He who striveth,
having commenced anything, till it is completed, who never wasteth his
time, and who hath his soul under control, is regarded wise. They that
are wise, O bull of the Bharata race, always delight in honest deeds, do
what tendeth to their happiness and prosperity, and never sneer at what
is good. He who exulteth not at honours, and grieveth not at slights, and
remaineth cool and unagitated like a lake in the course of Ganga, is
reckoned as wise. That man who knoweth the nature of all creatures (viz.,
that everything is subject to destruction), who is cognisant also of the
connections of all acts, and who is proficient in the knowledge of the
means that men may resort to (for attaining their objects), is reckoned
as wise. He who speaketh boldly, can converse on various subjects,
knoweth the science of argumentation, possesseth genius, and can
interpret the meaning of what is writ in books, is reckoned as wise. He
whose studies are regulated by reason, and whose reason followeth the
scriptures, and who never abstaineth from paying respect to those that
are good, is called a wise man. He, on the other hand, who is ignorant of
scripture yet vain, poor yet proud, and who resorteth to unfair means for
the acquisition of his objects, is a fool. He who, forsaking his own,
concerneth himself with the objects of others, and who practiseth
deceitful means for serving his friends, is called a fool. He who wisheth
for those things that should not be desired, and forsaketh those that may
legitimately be desired, and who beareth malice to those that are
powerful, is regarded to be a foolish soul. He who regardeth his foe as
his friend, who hateth and beareth malice to his friend, and who
committeth wicked deeds, is said to be a person of foolish soul. O bull
of the Bharata race, he who divulgeth his projects, doubteth in all
things, and spendeth a long time in doing what requireth a short time, is
a fool. He who doth not perform the Sraddha for the Pitris, nor
worshippeth the deities, nor acquireth noble-minded friends, is said to
be a person of foolish soul. That worst of men who entereth a place
uninvited, and talketh much without being asked, and reposeth trust on
untrustworthy wights, is a fool. That man who being himself guilty
casteth the blame on others, and who though impotent giveth vent to
anger, is the most foolish of men. That man, who, without knowing his own
strength and dissociated from both virtue and profit, desireth an object
difficult of acquisition, without again adopting adequate means, is said
to be destitute of intelligence. O king, he who punisheth one that is
undeserving of punishment, payeth homage to persons without their
knowledge, and waiteth upon misers, is said to be of little sense. But he
that, having attained immense wealth and prosperity or acquired (vast)
learning, doth not bear himself haughtily, is reckoned as wise. Who,
again, is more heartless than he, who, though possessed of affluence,
eateth himself and weareth excellent robes himself without distributing
his wealth among his dependents? While one person committeth sins, many
reap the advantage resulting therefrom; (yet in the end) it is the doer
alone to whom the sin attacheth while those that enjoy the fruit escape
unhurt. When a bowman shooteth an arrow, he may or may not succeed in
slaying even a single person, but when an intelligent individual applieth
his intelligence (viciously); it may destroy an entire kingdom with the
king. Discriminating the two by means of the one, bring under thy
subjection the three by means of four, and also conquering the five and
knowing the six, and abstaining from the seven, be happy. Poison slayeth
but one person, and a weapon also but one; wicked counsels, however,
destroy an entire kingdom with king and subject. Alone one should not
partake of any savoury viand, nor alone reflect on concerns of profit,
nor alone go upon a journey, nor alone remain awake among sleeping
companions. That Being who is One without a second, and whom, O king,
thou hast not been able to comprehend, is Truth's self, and the Way to
heaven, even like a boat in the ocean. There is one only defect in
forgiving persons, and not another; that defect is that people take a
forgiving person to be weak. That defect, however, should not be taken
into consideration, for forgiveness is a great power. Forgiveness is a
virtue of the weak, and an ornament of the strong. Forgiveness subdueth
(all) in this world; what is there that forgiveness cannot achieve? What
can a wicked person do unto him who carrieth the sabre of forgiveness in
his hand? Fire falling on a grassless ground is extinguished of itself.
And unforgiving individual defileth himself with many enormities.
Righteousness is the one highest good; and forgiveness is the one supreme
peace; knowledge is one supreme contentment; and benevolence, one sole
happiness. Even as a serpent devoureth animals living in holes, the earth
devoureth these two, viz., a king who is incompetent to fight, and a
Brahmana who doth not sojourn to holy places. A man may attain renown in
this world by doing two things, viz., by refraining from harsh speech,
and by disregarding those that are wicked. O tiger among men, these two
have not a will of their own, viz., those women who covet men simply
because the latter are coveted by others of their sex, and that person
who worships another simply because the latter is worshipped by others.
These two are like sharp thorns afflicting the body, viz., the desires of
a poor man, and the anger of the impotent. These two persons never shine
because of their incompatible acts, viz., a householder without exertion,
and a beggar busied in schemes. These two, O king, live (as it were) in a
region higher than heaven itself, viz., a man of power endued with
forgiveness, and poor man that is charitable. Of things honestly got,
these two must be looked upon as misuse, viz., making gifts to the
unworthy and refusing the worthy. These two should be thrown into the
water, tightly binding weights to their necks, viz., a wealthy man that
doth not give away, and a poor man that is proud. These two, O tiger
among men, can pierce the orb itself of the sun, viz., a mendicant
accomplished in yoga, and a warrior that hath fallen in open fight. O
bull of the Bharata race, persons versed in the Vedas have said that
men's means are good, middling, and bad. Men also, O king, are good,
indifferent, and bad. They should, therefore, be respectively employed in
that kind of work for which they may be fit. These three, O king, cannot
have wealth of their own, viz., the wife, the slave, and the son, and
whatever may be earned by them would be his to whom they belong. Great
fear springeth from these three crimes, viz., theft of other's property,
outrage on other's wives, and breach with friend. These three, besides,
being destructive to one's own self, are the gates of hell, viz., lust,
anger, and covetousness. Therefore, every one should renounce them. These
three should never be forsaken even in imminent danger, viz., a follower,
one who seeks protection, saying,--I am thine,--and lastly one who hath
come to your abode. Verily, O Bharata, liberating a foe from distress,
alone amounteth in point of merit, to these three taken together, viz.,
conferring a boon, acquiring a kingdom, and obtaining a son. Learned men
have declared that a king, although powerful, should never consult with
these four, viz., men of small sense, men that are procrastinating, men
that are indolent, and men that are flatterers. O sire, crowned with
prosperity and leading the life of a householder, let these four dwell
with thee, viz., old consanguineous, relatives, high-born persons fallen
into adversity, poor friends, and issueless sisters. On being asked by
the chief of the celestials, Vrihaspati, O mighty king declared four
things capable of fructifying or occurring within a single day, viz., the
resolve of the gods, the comprehensions of intelligent persons, the
humility of learned men, and the destruction of the sinful. These four
that are calculated to remove fear, bring on fear when they are
improperly performed, viz., the Agni-hotra, the vow of silence, study,
and sacrifice (in general). O bull of the Bharata race, these five fires,
should be worshipped with regard by a person, viz., father, mother, fire
(proper), soul and preceptor. By serving these five, men attain great
fame in this world, viz., the gods, the Pitris, men, beggars, and guests.
These five follow thee wherever thou goest, viz., friends, foes, those
that are indifferent, dependants, and those that are entitled to
maintenance. Of the five senses beholding to man, if one springeth a
leak, then from that single hole runneth out all his intelligence, even
like water running out from a perforated leathern vessel. The six faults
should be avoided by a person who wisheth to attain prosperity, viz.,
sleep, drowsiness, fear, anger, indolence and procrastination. These six
should be renounced like a splitting vessel in the sea, viz., a preceptor
that cannot expound the scriptures, a priest that is illiterate, a king
that is unable to protect, a wife that speaketh disagreeable words, a
cow-herd that doth not wish to go to the fields, and a barber that
wisheth to renounce a village for the woods. Verily, those six qualities
should never be forsaken by men, viz., truth, charity, diligence,
benevolence, forgiveness and patience. These six are instantly destroyed,
if neglected, viz., kine, service, agriculture, a wife, learning, and the
wealth of a Sudra. These six forget those who have bestowed obligations
on them, viz., educated disciples, their preceptors; married persons,
their mothers; persons whose desires have been gratified, women; they who
have achieved success, they who had rendered aid; they who have crossed a
river, the boat (that carried them over); and patients that have been
cured, their physicians. Health, unindebtedness, living at home,
companionship with good men, certainty as regards the means of
livelihood, and living without fear, these six. O king, conduce to the
happiness of men. These six are always miserable, viz., the envious, the
malicious, the discontented, the irascible, the ever-suspicious, and
those depending upon the fortunes of others. These six, O king, comprise
the happiness of men, viz., acquirement of wealth, uninterrupted health,
a beloved and a sweet-speeched wife, an obedient son, and knowledge that
is lucrative. He that succeedeth in gaining the mastery over the six that
are always present in the human heart, being thus the master of his
senses, never committeth sin, and therefore suffereth calamity. These six
may be seen to subsist upon other six, viz., thieves, upon persons that
are careless; physicians, on persons that are ailing; women, upon persons
suffering from lust; priests, upon them that sacrifice; a king, upon
persons that quarrel; and lastly men of learning, upon them that are
without it. A king should renounce these seven faults that are productive
of calamity, inasmuch as they are able to effect the ruin of even
monarchs firmly established; these are women, dice, hunting, drinking,
harshness of speech, severity of punishment, and misuse of wealth. These
eight are the immediate indications of a man destined to destruction,
viz., hating the Brahmanas, disputes with Brahmanas, appropriation of a
Brahmana's possessions, taking the life of Brahmana, taking a pleasure in
reviling Brahmanas, grieving to hear the praises of Brahmanas, forgetting
them on ceremonious occasions, and giving vent to spite when they ask for
anything. These transgressions a wise man should understand, and
understanding, eschew. These eight, O Bharata, are the very cream of
happiness, and these only are attainable here, viz., meeting with
friends, accession of immense wealth, embracing a son, union for
intercourse, conversation with friends in proper times, the advancement
of persons belong to one's own party, the acquisition of what had been
anticipated, and respect in society. These eight qualities glorify a man,
viz., wisdom, high birth, self-restraint, learning, prowess, moderation
in speech gift according to one's power, and gratitude. This house hath
nine doors, three pillars, and five witnesses. It is presided over by the
soul. That learned man who knoweth all this is truly wise. O
Dhritarashtra, these ten do not know what virtue is viz., the
intoxicated, inattentive, the raving, the fatigued, the angry, the
starving, the hasty, the covetous, the frightened, and the lustful.
Therefore, he that is wise must eschew the company of these. In this
connection is cited the old story about what transpired between Suyodhana
and (Prahlada), the chief of the Asuras in relation to the latter's son.
That king who renounceth lust and anger, who bestoweth wealth upon proper
recipients, and is discriminating, learned, and active, is regarded as an
authority of all men. Great prosperity attends upon that king who knoweth
how to inspire confidence in others, who inflicteth punishment on those
whose guilt hath been proved, who is acquainted with the proper measure
of punishment, and who knoweth when mercy is to be shown. He is a wise
person who doth not disregard even a weak foe; who proceeds with
intelligence in respect of a foe, anxiously watching for an opportunity;
who doth not desire hostilities with persons stronger than himself; and
who displayeth his prowess in season. That illustrious person who doth
not grieve when a calamity hath already come upon him, who exerteth with
all his senses collected, and who patiently beareth misery in season, is
certainly the foremost of persons, and all his foes are vanquished. He
who doth not live away from hope uselessly, who doth not make friends
with sinful persons, who never outrageth another's wife, who never
betrayeth arrogance, and who never committeth a theft or showeth
ingratitude or indulgeth in drinking is always happy. He who never
boastfully striveth to attain the three objects of human pursuit, who
when asked, telleth the truth, who quarreleth not even for the sake of
friends, and who never becometh angry though slighted, is reckoned as
wise. He who beareth not malice towards others but is kind to all, who
being weak disputeth not with others, who speaketh not arrogantly, and
forgeteth a quarrel, is praised everywhere. That man who never assumeth a
haughty mien, who never censureth others praising himself the while, and
never addresseth harsh words to others for getting himself, is ever loved
by all. He who raketh not up old hostilities, who behaveth neither
arrogantly nor with too much humility, and who even when distressed never
committeth an improper act, is considered by respectable men a person of
good conduct. He who exulteth not at his own happiness, nor delighteth in
another's misery, and who repenteth not after having made a gift, is said
to be a man of good nature and conduct. He who desireth to obtain a
knowledge of the customs of different countries, and also the languages
of different nations, and of the usages of different orders of men,
knoweth at once all that is high and low; and wherever he may go, he is
sure to gain an ascendancy over even those that are glad. The intelligent
man who relinquisheth pride, folly, insolence, sinful acts, disloyalty
towards the king, crookedness of behaviour, enmity with many, and also
quarrels with men that are drunk, mad and wicked, is the foremost of his
species. The very gods bestow prosperity upon him who daily practiseth
self-restraint, purification, auspicious rites, worship of the gods,
expiatory ceremonies, and other rites of universal observance. The acts
of that learned man are well-conceived, and well-applied who formeth
matrimonial alliances with persons of equal positions and not with those
that are inferior, who placeth those before him that are more qualified,
and who talketh, behaveth and maketh friendships with persons of equal
position. He who eateth frugally after dividing the food amongst his
dependants, who sleepeth little after working much, and who, when
solicited giveth away even unto his foes, hath his soul under control,
and calamities always keep themselves aloof from him. He whose counsels
are well-kept and well-carried out into practice, and whose acts in
consequence thereof are never known by others to injure men, succeedeth
in securing even his most trifling objects. He who is intent upon
abstaining from injury to all creatures, who is truthful, gentle,
charitable, and pure in mind, shineth greatly among his kinsmen like a
precious gem of the purest ray having its origin in an excellent mine.
That man who feeleth shame even though his faults be not known to any
save himself, is highly honoured among all men. Possessed of a pure heart
and boundless energy and abstracted within himself, he shineth in
consequence of his energy like the very sun. King Pandu consumed by a
(Brahmana's) curse, had five sons born unto him in the woods that are
like five Indras. O son of Ambika, thou hast brought up those children
and taught them everything. They are obedient to thy commands. Giving
them back their just share of the kingdom, O sire, filled with joy, be
thou happy with thy sons. Then, O monarch, thou shalt inspire confidence
in both the gods and men.'"
