SECTION XXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Dismissed with salutation by the Pandavas, Sanjaya
set out for (Hastinapura) having executed all the commands of the
illustrious Dhritarashtra. Reaching Hastinapura he quickly entered it,
and presented himself at the gate of the inner apartments of the palace.
Addressing the porter, he said, 'O gate-keeper, say unto Dhritarashtra
that I, Sanjaya, have just arrived, coming from the sons of Pandu. Do not
delay. If the king be awake, then only shouldst thou say so, O keeper,
for I like to enter having first apprised him of my arrival. In the
present instance I have something of very great importance to
communicate.' Hearing this, the gate-keeper went to the king and
addressed him, saying, 'O lord of earth, I bow to thee. Sanjaya is at thy
gates, desirous of seeing thee. He cometh, bearing a message from the
Pandavas. Issue your commands, O king, as to what he should do.'
"The king said, 'Tell Sanjaya that I am happy and hale. Let him enter.
Welcome to Sanjaya. I am always ready to receive him. Why should he stay
outside whose admission is never forbidden?"
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then, with the king's permission, having
entered that spacious apartment, the Suta's son, with joined hands,
approached the royal son of Vichitravirya who was protected by many wise,
valiant, and righteous persons, and who was then seated on his throne.
And Sanjaya addressed him, saying, 'I am Sanjaya, O king. I bow unto
thee. O chief of men, proceeding hence I found the sons of Pandu. After
having paid his salutations to thee, Pandu's son, the intelligent
Yudhishthira, enquired of thy welfare. And well-pleased, he also
enquireth after thy sons, and asketh thee whether thou art happy with thy
sons and grandsons and friends and counsellors, and, O king, all those
that depend upon thee.'
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O child, giving my blessings to Ajatasatru, I ask
thee, O Sanjaya, whether that king of the Kauravas, Pritha's son, is well
with his sons and brothers and counsellors.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Pandu's son is well with his counsellors. He desires
possessions of that which he formerly had as his own. He seeketh virtue
and wealth without doing anything that is censurable, possesseth
intelligence and vast learning, and is, besides, far-sighted and of
excellent disposition. With that son of Pandu, abstention from injury is
even superior to virtue, and virtue superior to the accumulation of
wealth. His mind, O Bharata, is always inclined to happiness and joy, and
to such course of action as are virtuous and conducive to the higher ends
of life. Even like doll pulled this way and that by threads, man (in this
world) moveth, swayed by a force not his own. Beholding the sufferings of
Yudhishthira, I regard the force of destiny to be Superior to the effect
of human exertion. Beholding again thy unworthy deeds, which, besides,
being highly sinful and unspeakable, are sure to terminate in misery, it
seemeth to me that one of thy nature winneth praise only so long as his
able foe bideth his time. Renouncing all sin, even as a serpent casteth
off its worn out slough which it cannot any longer retain, the heroic
Ajatasatru shineth in his natural perfection, leaving his load of sins to
be borne by thee. Consider, O king, thy own acts which are contrary to
both religion and profit, and to the behaviour of those that are
righteous. Thou hast, O king, earned a bad repute in this world, and wilt
reap misery in the next. Obeying the counsels of thy son thou hopest to
enjoy this doubtful property, keeping them aloof. This unrighteous deed
is loudly bruited about in the world, Therefore, O foremost of the
Bharatas, this deed is unworthy of thee. Calamity overtaketh him who is
deficient in wisdom, or who is of low birth, or who is cruel, or who
cherisheth hostility for a long time, or who is not steady in Kshatriya
virtues, or is devoid of energy, or is of a bad disposition, in fact, him
who hath such marks. It is by virtue of luck that a person taketh his
birth in good race, or becometh strong, or famous, or versed in various
lore, or possesseth the comforts of life, or becometh capable of subduing
his senses, or discriminating virtue and vice that are always linked
together. What person is there, who, attended upon by foremost of
counsellors, possessed of intelligence, capable of discriminating between
virtue and vice in times of distress, not destitute of the rituals of
religion, and retaining the use of all his faculties, would commit cruel
deeds. These counsellors, ever devoted to thy work, wait here united
together. Even this is their firm determination (viz., that the Pandavas
are not to get back their share). The destruction of the Kurus,
therefore, is certain to be brought about by the force of circumstances.
If, provoked by the offences, Yudhishthira wisheth for misery to thee,
then Kurus will be destroyed prematurely, while, imparting all his sins
to thee, the blame of that deed will be thine in this world. Indeed, what
else is there save the will of the Gods, for Arjuna, the son of Pritha,
leaving this world ascended to the very heavens and was honoured there
very greatly. This proves that individual exertion is nothing. There is,
no doubt, as to this. Seeing that the attributes of high birth, bravery,
etc., depended for their development or otherwise on acts, and beholding
also prosperity and adversity and stability and instability (in persons
and their possessions), king Vali, in his search after causes, having
failed to discover a beginning (in the chain of acts of former lives one
before another), regarded the eternal Essence to be the cause of
everything. The eye, the ear, the nose, the touch, and the tongue, these
are the doors of a person's knowledge. If desire be curbed, these would
be gratified by themselves. Therefore, cheerfully and without repining
one should control the senses. Others there are that think differently.
They hold that if a person's acts are well-applied, these must produce
the desired result. Thus the child begot by the act of the mother and the
father grows when duly tended with food and drink. Men in this world
become subject to love and hate, pleasure and pain, praise and blame. A
man is praised when he behaves honestly. Thee I blame, since these
dissensions of the Bharatas (whose root thou art) will surely bring about
the destruction of innumerable lives. If peace be not concluded, then
through thy fault Arjuna will consume the Kurus like a blazing fire
consuming a heap of dried grass. O ruler of men, thou alone of all the
world, yielding to thy son whom no restraints can blind, hadst regarded
thyself as crowned with success and abstained from avoiding dispute at
the time of the match at dice. Behold now the fruit of that (weakness of
thine)! O monarch, by rejecting advisers that are faithful and accepting
those that deserve no confidence, this extensive and prosperous empire, O
son of Kuru, thou art unable to retain owing to thy weakness. Wearied by
my fast journey and very much fatigued, I solicit thy permission to go to
bed now, O lion of men, for tomorrow morning will the Kurus, assembled
together in the council-hall, hear the words of Ajatasatru.'"
