SECTION XLVI
"Sanat-sujata said, 'The primary Seed (of the universe), called
Mahayasas, is destitute of accidents, is pure Knowledge, and blazeth with
effulgence. It leadeth the senses, and it is in consequence of that Seed
that Surya shineth. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yogins (by their mental eye). It is in consequence of that Seed (which is
Joy's self) that Brahman becomes capable of Creation and it is through it
that Brahman increaseth in expansion. It is that Seed which entering into
luminous bodies giveth light and heat. Without deriving its light and
heat from any other thing it is self-luminous, and is an object of terror
to all luminous bodies. The Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yogins (by their mental eye). The body composed of the five grosser
elements, that are themselves sprung from the five subtler ones,--the
latter, in their turn, originating in one homogeneous substance called
Brahman--is upheld (realised) in consciousness by both the creature-Soul
endued with life and Iswara. (These two, during sleep and the universal
dissolution, are deprived of consciousness). Brahman on the other hand,
which is never bereft of consciousness, and which is the Sun's Sun,
upholdeth both these two and also the Earth and the Heaven. The Eternal
One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their mental eye). The
Seed upholdeth the two gods, the Earth and the Heaven, the Directions,
and the whole Universe. It is from that Seed that directions (points of
the compass) and rivers spring, and the vast seas also have derived their
origin. The Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by
their mental eye). The body is like a car destined to destruction. Its
acts, however, are undying. Tied to the wheels of that car (which are
represented by the acts of past lives), the senses, that are as steeds,
lead, through the region of consciousness, the man of wisdom towards that
Increate and Unchangeable One, that One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yogins (by their mental eye). The form of that One cannot be displayed by
any comparison. None ever beholdeth Him by the eye. They that know him by
the rapt faculties, the mind, and the heart, become freed from death. The
Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their mental
eye). The stream of illusion is terrible; guarded by the gods, it hath
twelve fruits. Drinking of its waters and beholding many sweet things in
its midst, men swim along it to and fro. This stream flows from that
Seed. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their
mental eye). Destined to sojourn to and fro, the creature-Soul, having
reflected enjoyeth (in the other world) only half of the fruits of his
acts. It is that creature-Soul which is Iswara, pervading everything in
the universe. It is Iswara that hath ordained sacrifices. That Eternal
One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their mental eye). Souls
divested of accidents, resorting to Avidya, which is like unto a tree of
golden foliage, assume accidents, and take births in different orders
according to their propensities. That Eternal One endued with Divinity
(in Whom all those Souls are united) is beheld by Yogins (by their mental
eye). Accidents (which coming in contact with Brahman make the latter
assume many forms) raise the universe in its Fulness from that Brahman
which is full. Those accidents also, in their Fulness, arise from Brahman
in its Fulness. When one succeeds in dispelling all accidents from
Brahman which is ever Full, that which remains is Brahman in its Fulness.
That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their
mental eye). It is from that Seed that the five elements have arisen, and
it is in it that the power resideth for controlling them. It is from that
Seed that both the consumer and the consumed (called Agni and Soma) have
sprung, and it is in it that the living organisms with the senses rest.
Everything should be regarded to have sprung from it. That Seed called in
the Vedas TATH (Tad), we are unable to describe. That Eternal One endued
with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their mental eye). The vital air
called Apana is swallowed up by the Air called Prana; Prana is swallowed
up by the Will, and the Will by the Intellect, and the Intellect by the
Supreme Soul. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins
(by their mental eye). The Supreme Soul endued with four legs, called
respectively Waking, Dream, profound Sleep, and Turiya, like unto a swan,
treading above the unfathomable ocean of worldly affairs doth not put
forth one leg that is hid deep. Unto him that beholdeth that leg (viz.,
Turiya) as put forth for the purpose of guiding the other three, both
death and emancipation are the same. That Eternal One endued with
Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their mental eye). Of the measure of the
thumb, ever Full, and different from this eternal organism, coming in
contact with the Vital airs, the Will, the Intellect, and the ten Senses,
it moveth to and fro. That Supreme Controller, worthy of reverential
hymns, capable of everything when vested with accidents and the prime
cause of everything, is manifest as Knowledge in creature-Souls. Fools
alone do not behold him; that Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld
by Yogins (by their mental eye). Among individuals there are those that
have obtained the mastery of their minds, and those that have not. Yet in
all men the Supreme Soul may be seen equally. Indeed, it resideth equally
in him that is emancipate and in him that is not, with only this
difference that they that are emancipate obtain honey flowing in a thick
jet. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their
mental eye). When one maketh life's Sojourn, having attained to the
knowledge of Self and Not-Self, then it matters little whether his
Agni-hotra is performed or not. O monarch, let not such words as 'I am
thy servant' fall from their lips. The Supreme Soul hath another name,
viz., Pure Knowledge. They only that have restrained their minds obtain
Him. That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their
mental eye). Even such is He. Illustrious and Full, all living creatures
are merged into Him. He that knoweth that embodiment of Fullness
attaineth to his object (emancipation) even here. That Eternal One endued
with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by their mental eye). That which
flieth away stretching forth thousands of wings, yea, if endued with the
speed of the mind, must yet come back to the Central Spirit within the
living organism (in which the most distant things reside... That Eternal
One endued with Divinity) is beheld by Yogins (by their mental eye). His
form cannot be an object of sight. They only, that are of pure hearts,
can behold him. When one seeketh the good of all, succeedeth in
controlling his mind, and never suffereth his heart to be affected by
grief, then he is said to have purified his heart. Those again that can
abandon the world and all its cares, become immortal. (That Supreme Soul
which is undying),--that Eternal One endued with Divinity--is beheld by
Yogins (by their mental eye). Like serpents concealing themselves in
holes, there are persons who following the dictates of their preceptors,
or by their own conduct conceal their vices from scrutiny's gaze. They
that are of little sense are deceived by these. In fact, bearing
themselves outwardly without any impropriety, these deceive their victims
for leading them to hell. (Him, therefore, who may be attained by
companionship with persons of the very opposite class), that Eternal One
endued with Divinity--is beheld by Yogins (by their mental eye). He that
is emancipate thinks,--this transitory organism can never make me liable
to joy and grief and the other attributes inhering to it: nor can there
be, in my case, anything like death and birth: and, further, when
Brahman, which hath no opposing force to contend against and which is
alike in all times and all places, constitutes the resting-place of both
realities and unrealities, how can emancipation be mine? It is I alone
that am the origin and the end of all causes and effects.--(Existing in
the form of I or Self) that Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by
Yogins (by their mental eye). The Brahman-knowing person, who is equal
unto Brahman itself, is neither glorified by good acts nor defiled by bad
ones. It is only in ordinary men that acts, good or bad, produce
different results. The person that knoweth Brahman should be regarded as
identical with Amrita or the state called Kaivalya which is incapable of
being affected by either virtue or vice. One should, therefore, disposing
his mind in the way indicated, attain to that essence of sweetness
(Brahman). That Eternal One endued with Divinity is beheld by Yogins (by
their mental eye). Slander grieveth not the heart of the person that
knoweth Brahman not the thought--I have not studied (the Veda), or, I
have not performed my Agni-hotra. The knowledge of Brahman soon imparteth
to him that wisdom which they only obtain who have restrained their mind.
(That Brahman which freeth the Soul from grief and ignorance)-that
Eternal One endued with Divinity-is beheld by Yogins (by their mental
eye). He, therefore, that beholdeth his own Self in everything, hath no
longer to grieve, for they only have to grieve who are employed in
diverse other occupations of the world. As one's purposes (appeasing
thirst, etc.) may be served in a well as in a large reservoir or vast
expanse, so the various purposes of the Vedas may all be derivable by him
that knoweth the Soul. Dwelling in the heart, and of the measure of the
thumb, that illustrious One--the embodiment of Fullness--is not an object
of sight. Unborn he moveth, awake day and night. He that knoweth him,
becometh both learned and full of joy. I am called the mother and father.
I am again the son. Of all that was, and of all that we will be, I am the
Soul. O Bharata, I am the old grandsire, I am the father, I am the son.
Ye are staying in my soul, yet ye are not mine, nor am I yours! The Soul
is the cause of my birth and procreation. I am the warp and woof of the
universe. That upon which I rest is indestructible. Unborn I move, awake
day and night. It is I knowing whom one becometh both learned and full of
joy. Subtler than the subtle, of excellent eyes capable of looking into
both the past and the future, Brahman is awake in every creature. They
that knows Him know that Universal Father dwelleth in the heart of every
created thing!'"
