SECTION XLVIII
"Dhritarashtra said, "I ask thee, O Sanjaya, in the presence of my boy
and of these kings, what words were said by the illustrious Dhananjaya of
might that knoweth no diminution,--that leader of warriors,--that
destroyer of the lives of the wicked?'
"Sanjaya said, 'Let Duryodhana listen to the words which the high-souled
Arjuna, eager for fight, uttered, with Yudhishthira's sanction and in the
hearing of Kesava. Fearless (in battle) and conscious of the might of his
arms, the heroic Kiritin, eager for fight, spoke thus unto me in the
presence of Vasudeva, 'Do thou, O suta, say unto Dhritarashtra's son, in
the presence of all the Kurus, and also in the hearing of that Suta's
son, of foul tongue and wicked soul, of little sense, stupid reason, and
of numbered days, who always desires to fight against me, and also in the
hearing of those kings assembled for fighting against the Pandavas, and
do thou see that all the words now uttered by me are heard well by that
king with his counsellors.' O monarch, even as the celestials eagerly
listen to the words of their chief armed with the thunderbolt, so did the
Pandavas and the Srinjayas listened to those words of grave import
uttered by Kiritin. Just these are the words spoken by Arjuna, the
wielder of Gandiva, eager for the fight and with eyes red as the lotus,
'If Dhritarashtra's son doth not surrender to king Yudhishthira of the
Ajamida race, his kingdom, then (it is evident) there must be some sinful
act committed by the sons of Dhritarashtra, whose consequences are yet
unreaped by them, for it can be nothing else when they desire battle with
Bhimasena and Arjuna, and the Aswins and Vasudeva and Sini's son, and
Dhrishtadyumna infallible in arms, and Sikhandin, and Yudhishthira, who
is like Indra himself and who can consume heaven and earth by merely
wishing them ill. If Dhritarashtra's son desireth war with these, then
will all objects of the Pandavas be accomplished. Do not, therefore,
propose peace for the sons of Pandu, but have war if thou likest. That
bed of woe in the woods which was Yudhishthira's when that virtuous son
of Pandu lived in exile; Oh, let a more painful bed than that, on the
bare earth, be now Duryodhana's and let him lie down on it, as his last,
deprived of life. Win thou over those men that were ruled by the wicked
Duryodhana of unjust conduct to the side of Pandu's son endued with
modesty and wisdom and asceticism and self-restraint and valour and might
regulated by virtue. Endued with humility and righteousness, with
asceticism and self-restraint and with valour regulated by virtue, and
always speaking the truth, our king, though afflicted by numerous
deceptions, hath forgiven all and hath patiently borne great wrongs. When
the eldest son of Pandu, of soul under proper control, will indignantly
dart at the Kurus his terrible wrath accumulated for years, then will the
son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. As a blazing fire burning all
around consumeth dry grass in the hot season, so will Yudhishthira,
inflamed with wrath, consume the Dhritarashtra host by glance alone of
his eye. When Dhritarashtra's son will behold Bhimasena, that wrathful
Pandava of terrific impetus, stationed on his car, mace in hand, vomiting
the venom of his wrath, then will Duryodhana repent for this war. Indeed,
when he will behold Bhimasena, who always fighteth in the van, accoutred
in mail, scarcely capable of being looked at even by his own followers
felling hostile heroes and devastating the enemy's ranks like Yama
himself, then will the exceedingly vain Duryodhana recollect these words.
When he will behold elephants, looking like mountain-peaks, felled by
Bhimasena, blood flowing their broken heads like water from broken casks,
then will Dhritarashtra's son repent for this war. When falling upon the
sons of Dhritarashtra the fierce Bhima of terrible mien, mace in hand,
will slaughter them, like a huge lion falling upon a herd of kine, then
will Duryodhana repent for this war. When the heroic Bhima undaunted even
in situations of great danger and skilled in weapons-when that grinder of
hostile hosts in battle,--mounted on his car, and alone will crush by his
mace crowds of superior cars and entire ranks of infantry, seize by his
nooses strong as iron, the elephants of the hostile army, and mow down
the Dhritarashtra's host, like a sturdy woodsman cutting a forest down
with an axe, then will Dhritarashtra's son repent for this war. When he
will behold the Dhartarashtra's host consumed like a hamlet full of
straw-built huts by fire, or a field of ripe corn by lightning,--indeed
when he will behold his vast army scattered, its leaders slain, and men
running away with their back towards the field afflicted with fear, and
all the warriors, humbled to the dust, being scorched by Bhimasena with
the fire of his weapons,--then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for
this war, When Nakula, that warrior of wonderful feats, that foremost of
all car-warriors, dexterously shooting arrows by hundreds, will mangle
the car-warriors of Duryodhana, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent
for this war. Accustomed to enjoy all the comforts and luxuries of life,
when Nakula, recollecting that bed of woe on which he had slept for a
long time in the woods, will vomit the poison of his wrath like an angry
snake, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. Ready to
lay down their very lives, the (allied) monarchs, O Suta, urged to battle
by king Yudhishthira the just, will furiously advance on their
resplendent cars against the (hostile) army. Beholding this, the son of
Dhritarashtra will certainly have to repent. When the Kuru prince will
behold the five heroic sons of (Draupadi), tender in years but not in
acts, and all well-versed in arms, rush, reckless of their lives, against
the Kauravas, then will that son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war.
When bent upon carnage Sahadeva, mounted on his car of noiseless wheels,
and motion incapable of being obstructed, and set with golden stars, and
drawn by well-trained steeds, will make the heads of monarchs roll on the
field of battle with volleys of arrows,--indeed, beholding that warrior
skilled in weapons, seated on his car in the midst of that frightful
havoc, turning now to the left and now to the right and falling upon the
foe in all directions, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
war. Indeed, when the modest but mighty Sahadeva, skilled in battle,
truthful, conversant with all the ways of morality, and endued with great
activity and impetuousness, will fall upon the son of Gandhari in fierce
encounter and rout all his followers, then will the son of Dhritarashtra
repent for this war. When he will behold the sons of Draupadi, those
great bowmen, those heroes skilled in weapons and well-versed in all the
ways of chariot-fighting, dart at the foe like snakes of virulent poison,
then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When that slayer
of hostile heroes, Abhimanyu, skilled in arms like Krishna himself, will
overpower the foe showering upon them, like the very clouds, a thick
downpour of arrows, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
war. Indeed, when he will behold that son of Subhadra, a child in years
but not in energy, skilled in weapons and like unto Indra himself,
failing like Death's self upon the ranks of the foe, then will the son of
Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When the youthful Prabhadrakas, endued
with great activity, well-versed in battle, and possessed of the energy
of lions will overthrow the sons of Dhritarashtra with all their troops,
then will Duryodhana repent for this war. When those veteran car-warriors
Virata and Drupada will assail, at the head of their respective
divisions, the sons of Dhritarashtra and their ranks, then will
Duryodhana repent for this war. When Drupada, skilled in weapons, and
seated on his car, desirous of plucking the heads of youthful warriors,
will wrathfully strike them off with arrows shot from his bow, then will
the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When that slayer of hostile
heroes, Virata will penetrate into the ranks of the foe, grinding all
before him with the aid of his Matsya warriors of cool courage, then will
the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When he will behold in the
very van the eldest son of the Matsya king, of cool courage and collected
mien, seated on his car and accoutred in mail on behalf of the Pandavas,
then will the son of Dhritarashtra. repent for this war. I tell thee
truly that when that foremost of Kaurava heroes, the virtuous son of
Santanu, will be slain in battle by Sikhandin, then all our foes, without
doubt, will perish. Indeed, when, overthrowing numerous car-warriors,
Sikhandin, seated on his own well-protected car, will proceed towards
Bhishma, crushing multitudes of (hostile) cars by means of his own
powerful steeds, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war.
When he will behold Dhristadyumna unto whom Drona hath imparted all the
mysteries of the science of weapons, stationed in splendour in the very
van of the Srinjaya ranks, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent.
Indeed, when the leader of the Pandava host, of immeasurable prowess and
capable of withstanding the rush of any force, will proceed to attack
Drona in battle, crushing with his arrows the Dhritarashtra ranks, then
will Duryodhana repent for this war. What enemy can withstand him who
hath, for fighting in his van, that lion of the Vrishni race, that chief
of the Somakas, who is modest and intelligent, mighty and endued with
great energy, and blessed with every kind of prosperity? Say also this
(unto Duryodhana),--Do not covet (the kingdom). We have chosen, for our
leader, the dauntless and mighty car-warrior Satyaki, the grandson of
Sini, skilled in weapons and having none on earth as his equal. Of broad
chest and long arms, that grinder of foes, unrivalled in battle, and
acquainted with the best of weapons, the grandson of Sini, skilled in
arms and perfectly dauntless, is a mighty car-warrior wielding a bow of
full four cubits' length. When that slayer of foes, that chief of the
Sinis, urged by me, will shower, like the very clouds, his arrows on the
foe, completely overwhelming their leaders with that downpour, then will
the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When that illustrious
warrior of long arms and firm grasp of the bow, musters his resolution
for fight, the foe then, like kine getting the scent of the lion, fly
away from him before even commencing the encounter. That illustrious
warrior of long arms and firm grasp of the bow is capable of splitting
the very hills and destroying the entire universe. Practised in weapons,
skilled (in battle), and endued with exceeding lightness of hand, he
shineth on the field of battle like the sun himself in the sky. That lion
of the Vrishni race, that scion of Yadu's line, of superior training,
hath diverse wonderful and excellent weapons. Indeed, Satyaki is
possessed of a knowledge of all those uses of weapons that are said to be
of the highest excellence. When he will behold in battle the golden car
of Satyaki of Madhu's race, drawn by four white steeds, then will that
wretch of uncontrolled passions, the son of Dhritarashtra, repent. When
he will also behold my terrible car, endued with the effulgence of gold
and bright gems, drawn by white steeds and furnished with the banner
bearing the device of the Ape and guided by Kesava himself, then will
that wretch of uncontrolled passions repent. When he will hear the fierce
twang produced by the constant stretch of the bow-string with fingers
cased in leather gloves,--that terrible twang, loud as the rolling of the
thunder, of my bow Gandiva wielded by me in the midst of the great
battle,--then will that wicked wretch, the son of Dhritarashtra repent,
beholding himself abandoned by his troops, flying away like kine from the
field of battle in all directions, overwhelmed with the darkness created
by my arrowy downpour. When he will behold innumerable keen-edged arrows,
furnished with beautiful wings, and capable of penetrating into the very
vitals, shot from the string of Gandiva, like fierce and terrible flashes
of lightning emitted by the clouds, destroying enemies by thousands, and
devouring numberless steeds and elephants clad in mail, then will the son
of Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When he will behold the arrows shot
by the enemy turned off, or turned back struck by my shafts, or cut to
pieces pierced transversely by my arrows, then will the foolish son of
Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When broad-headed arrows shot by my
hands will strike off the heads of youthful warriors, like birds picking
off fruits from the tree-tops, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent
for this war. When he will behold excellent warriors of his failing down
from their cars, and elephants and steeds rolling on the field, deprived
of life by my arrows, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
war. When he will behold his brothers, even before fairly coming within
the range of the enemy's weapons, die all around, without having achieved
anything in battle, then will the son of Dhritarashtra repent for this
war. When pouring my blazing shafts incessantly, I will, like Death
himself with mouth wide-open, destroy on all sides multitudes of cars and
foot-soldiers, then will that wretch repent. When he will behold his own
troops, covered with the dust raised by my car wander in all directions,
torn to pieces by Gandiva and reft of senses, then will that wretch
repent. When he will behold his whole army running away in fear in all
directions, mangled in limbs, and bereft of senses; when he will behold
his steeds, elephants, and foremost of heroes slain; when he will see his
troops thirsty, struck with panic, wailing aloud, dead and dying, with
their animals exhausted; and hair, bones and skulls lying in heaps around
like half-wrought works of the Creator, then will that wretch repent.
When he will behold on my car, Gandiva, Vasudeva, and the celestial conch
Panchajanya, myself, my couple of inexhaustible quivers, and my conch
called Devadatta as also my white steeds, then will the son of
Dhritarashtra repent for this war. When I consume the Kauravas, like Agni
consuming innumerable wicked souls assembled together at the time of
ushering in another Yuga at the end of the last one, then Dhritarashtra
with all his sons repent. When the wicked, hearted and the wrathful son
of Dhritarashtra will be deprived of prosperity with brothers and army
and followers, then, reft of pride and losing heart and trembling all
over, will that fool repent. One morning when I had finished my
water-rites and prayers, a Brahmana spoke unto me these pleasant words,
'O Partha, thou shalt have to execute a very difficult task. O
Savyasachin, thou shalt have to fight with thy foes. Either Indra riding
on his excellent steed and thunderbolt in hand will walk before thee
slaying thy foes in battle, or Krishna, the son of Vasudeva will protect
thee from behind riding on his car drawn by the steeds headed by Sugriva.
Relying on those words, I have, in this battle passing over Indra, the
wielder of the thunderbolt, preferred Vasudeva as my ally. That Krishna
hath been obtained by me for the destruction of those wicked ones. I see
the hand of the gods in all this. The person whose success is only wished
for by Krishna, without the latter's actually taking up arms in his
behalf, is certain to prevail over all enemies, even if those be the
celestials with Indra at their head, while anxiety there is none if they
be human. He that wisheth to conquer in battle that foremost of heroes,
Vasudeva's son Krishna endued with great energy, wisheth to cross by his
two arms alone the great ocean of wide expanse and immeasurable water.
He. that wisheth to split by a slap of his palm the high Kailasa
mountain, is not able to do the slightest damage to the mountain although
his hand only with its nails is sure to wear away. He that would conquer
Vasudeva in battle, would, with his two arms, extinguish a blazing fire,
stop the Sun and the Moon, and plunder by force the Amrita of the
gods,--that Vasudeva, viz., who having mowed down in battle by main force
all the royal warriors of the Bhoja race, had carried off on a single car
Rukmini of great fame for making her his wife; and by her was afterwards
born Pradyumna of high soul. It was this favourite of the gods, who,
having speedily smashed the Gandharas and conquered all the sons of
Nagnajit, forcibly liberated from confinement king Sudarsana of great
energy. It was he that slew king Pandya by striking his breast against
his, and moved down the Kalingas in battle Burnt by him, the city of
Varanasi remained for many years without e king, incapable of being
defeated by others. Ekalavya, the king of the Nishadas, always used to
challenge this one to battle; but slain by Krishna he lay dead like the
Asura Jambha violently thrashed on a hillock. It was Krishna, who, having
Baladeva for his second, slew Ugrasena's wicked son (Kansa), seated in
court in the midst of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, and then gave unto
Ugrasena the kingdom. It was Krishna who fought with king Salya, the lord
of Saubha, stationed in the skies, fearless in consequence of his powers
of illusion; and it was he, who, at the gate of Subha caught with his
hands the fierce Sataghni (hurled by Saubha's lord). What mortal is able
to bear his might? The Asuras had a city named Pragjyotisha, which was
formidable, inaccessible and unbearable. It was there that the mighty
Naraka, the son of the Earth, kept the jewelled ear-rings of Aditi,
having brought them by force. The very gods, who, fearless of death,
assembled together with Sakra at their head were incapable of conquering
him. Beholding Kesava's prowess and might, and weapon that is
irresistible, and knowing also the object of his birth, the gods employed
him for the destruction of those Asuras. Vasudeva, too, endued with all
the divine attributes that ensure success, agreed to undertake that
exceedingly difficult task. In the city of Nirmochana that hero slew six
thousand Asuras, and cutting into pieces innumerable keen-edged shafts,
he slew Mura and hosts of Rakshasas, and then entered that city. It was
there, that an encounter took place between the mighty' Naraka and Vishnu
of immeasurable strength. Slain by Krishna, Naraka lay lifeless there,
like a Karnikara tree uprooted by the wind. Having slain the Earth's son,
Naraka, and also Mura, and having recovered those jewelled ear-rings, the
learned Krishna of unparalleled prowess came back, adorned with beauty
and undying fame. Having witnessed his terrible feats in that battle, the
gods then and there blessed him saying, 'Fatigue will never be thine in
fights, neither the firmament nor the waters shall stop thy course, nor
shall weapons penetrate thy body.' And Krishna, by all this, regarded
himself amply rewarded. Immeasurable, and possessed of great might, in
Vasudeva ever exist all the virtues. And yet the son of Dhritarashtra
seeketh to vanquish that unbearable Vishnu of infinite energy, for that
wretch often thinks of imprisoning him. Krishna, however, beareth all
this for our sake only. That wretch seeketh to create a sudden disunion
between Krishna and myself. How far, however, he is capable of taking
away the affection of Krishna from the Pandavas, he will see on the field
of battle. Having bowed down unto Santanu's son, and also Drona with his
son, and the unrivalled son of Saradwat, I shall fight for regaining our
kingdom. The God of justice himself, I am sure, will bring destruction on
that sinful man who will fight with the Pandavas. Deceitfully defeated at
dice by those wretches, ourselves, of royal birth, had to pass twelve
years in great distress in the forest and one long year in a state of
concealment. When those Pandavas are still alive, how shall the sons of
Dhritarashtra rejoice, possessing rank and affluence? If they vanquish us
in fight, aided by the very gods headed by Indra, the then practice of
vice would be better than virtue, and surely there would be nothing like
righteousness on earth. If man is affected by his acts, if we be superior
to Duryodhana, then, I hope that, with Vasudeva as my second, I shall
slay Duryodhana, with all his kinsmen. O lord of men, if the act of
robbing us of our kingdom be wicked, if these our own good deeds be not
fruitless, than beholding both this and that, it seems to me, the
overthrow of Duryodhana is certain. Ye Kauravas, ye will see it with your
eyes that, if they fight, the sons of Dhritarashtra shall certainly
perish. If they act otherwise instead of fighting, then they may live;
but in the event of a battle ensuing, none of them will be left alive.
Slaying all the sons of Dhritarashtra along with Karna, I shall surely
wrest the hole of their kingdom, Do ye, meanwhile, whatever ye think
best, and enjoy also your wives and other sweet things of life. There
are, with us, many aged Brahmanas, versed in various sciences, of amiable
behaviour, well-born, acquainted with the cycle of the years, engaged in
the study of astrology, capable of understanding with certainty the
motions of planets and the conjunctions of stars as also of explaining
the mysteries of fate, and answering questions relating to the future,
acquainted with the signs of the Zodiac, and versed with the occurrences
of every hour, who are prophesying the great destruction of the Kurus and
the Srinjayas, and the ultimate victory of the Pandavas, so that
Yudhishthira, who never made an enemy, already regardeth his objects
fulfilled in consequence of the slaughter of his foes. And Janardana
also, that lion among the Vrishnis, endued with the knowledge of the
invisible future, without doubt, beholdeth all this. And I also, with
unerring foresight, myself behold that future, for that foresight of
mine, acquired of old, is not obstructed. The sons of Dhritarashtra, if
they fight, will not live. My bow, Gandiva, yawneth without being
handled; my bow-string trembleth without being stretched; and arrows
also, issuing from my quiver's mouth, are again and again seeking to fly.
My bright scimitar issueth of itself from its sheath, like a snake
quitting its own worn off slough; and on the top of my flag-staff are
heard terrific voices,--When shall thy car be yoked, O Kiritin?
Innumerable jackals set up hideous howls at night, and Rakshasas
frequently alight from the sky; deer and jackals and peacocks, crows and
vultures and cranes, and wolves and birds of golden plumage, follow in
the rear of my car when my white steeds are yoked unto it. Single-handed
I can despatch, with arrowy showers, all warlike kings, to the regions of
death. As a blazing fire consumeth a forest in the hot season, so,
exhibiting diverse courses, I will hurl those great weapons called
Sthur-karna, Pasupata, and Brahma, and all those that Sakra gave me, all
of which are endued with fierce impetuosity. And with their aid, setting
my heart on the destruction of those monarchs, I will leave no remnant of
those that come to the field of battle. I will rest, having done all
this. Even this is my chief and decided resolve. Tell them this, O son of
Gavalgana. Look at the folly of Duryodhana! O Suta, they that are
invincible in battle even if encountered with the aid of the very gods
headed by Indra,--even against them that son of Dhritarashtra thinketh of
warring! But so let it be even as the aged Bhishma, the son of Santanu,
and Kripa, and Drona with his son, and Vidura endued with great wisdom,
are saying, 'May the Kauravas all live long!"
