
SECTION LXXV
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hear now, as I recite the recorded genealogy, that
is sacred and subservient to religion, profit and pleasure, of these
royal sages--Daksha, the lord of creation, Manu, the son of Surya,
Bharata, Ruru, Puru, and Ajamidha. I shall also recite to thee, O sinless
one, the genealogies of the Yadavas and of the Kurus and of the king of
the Bharata line. These genealogies are sacred and their recitation is a
great act of propitiation. That recitation conferreth wealth, fame and
long life. And, O sinless one, all these I have named shone in their
splendour and were equal unto the great Rishis in energy.
"Prachetas had ten sons who were all devoted to asceticism and possessed
of every virtue. They burnt, of old, by the fire emanating from their
mouths, several plants of poisonous and innumerable large trees that had
covered the Earth and became a source of great discomfort to man. After
these ten, was born another named Daksha. It is from Daksha that all
creatures have sprung. Therefore is he, O tiger among men, called the
Grandfather. Born of Prachetas the Muni Daksha, uniting himself with
Virini, begat a thousand sons of rigid vows, all like himself. And Narada
taught these thousand sons of Daksha the excellent philosophy of Sankhya
as a means of salvation. And, O Janamejaya, the lord of creation, Daksha,
then, from the desire of making creatures, begat fifty daughters. And he
made all of them his appointed daughters (so that their sons might be his
sons also for the performance of all religious acts). And he bestowed ten
of his daughters on Dharma, and thirteen on Kasyapa. And he gave
twenty-seven to Chandra, who are all engaged in indicating time. And
Kasyapa, the son of Marichi, begat on the eldest of his thirteen wives,
the Adityas, the celestials endued with great energy and having Indra as
their head and also Vivaswat (the Sun). And of Vivaswat was born the lord
Yama. And Martanda (Vivaswat) also begat another son after Yama, gifted
with great intelligence and named Manu. And Manu was endued with great
wisdom and devoted to virtue. And he became the progenitor of a line. And
in Manu's race have been born all human beings, who have, therefore, been
called Manavas. And it is of Manu that all men including Brahmanas,
Kshatriyas, and others have been descended, and are, therefore, all
called Manavas. Subsequently, O monarch, the Brahmanas became united with
the Kshatriyas. And those sons of Manu that were Brahmanas devoted
themselves to the study of the Vedas. And Manu begat ten other children
named Vena, Dhrishnu, Narishyan, Nabhaga, Ikshvaku, Karusha, Saryati, the
eighth, a daughter named Ila, Prishadhru the ninth, and Nabhagarishta,
the tenth. They all betook themselves to the practices of Kshatriyas.
Besides these, Manu had fifty other sons on Earth. But we heard that they
all perished, quarrelling with one another. The learned Pururavas was
born of Ila. It hath been heard by us that Ila was both his mother and
father. And the great Pururavas had sway over thirteen islands of the
sea. And, though a human being, he was always surrounded by companions
that were superhuman. And Pururavas intoxicated with power quarrelled
with the Brahmanas and little caring for their anger robbed them of their
wealth. Beholding all this Sanatkumara came from the region of Brahman
and gave him good counsel, which was, however, rejected by Pururavas.
Then the wrath of the great Rishis was excited, and the avaricious
monarch, who intoxicated with power, had lost his reason, was immediately
destroyed by their curse.
"It was Pururavas who first brought from the region of the Gandharvas the
three kinds of fire (for sacrificial purpose). And he brought thence, the
Apsara Urvasi also. And the son of Ila begat upon Urvasi six sons who
were called Ayus, Dhimat, Amavasu and Dhridhayus, and Vanayus, and
Satayus. And it is said that Ayus begat four sons named Nahusha,
Vriddhasarman, Rajingaya, and Anenas, on the daughter of Swarbhanu. And,
O monarch, Nahusha, of all the sons of Ayus, being gifted with great
intelligence and prowess ruled his extensive kingdom virtuously. And king
Nahusha supported evenly the Pitris, the celestials, the Rishis, the
Brahmanas, the Gandharvas, the Nagas, the Rakshasas, the Kshatriyas, and
the Vaisyas. And he suppressed all robber-gangs with a mighty hand. But
he made the Rishis pay tribute and carry him on their backs like bests of
burden. And, conquering the very gods by the beauty of his person, his
asceticism, prowess, and energy, he ruled as if he were Indra himself.
And Nahusha begat six sons, all of sweet speech, named Yati, Yayati,
Sanyati, Ayati, and Dhruva. Yati betaking himself to asceticism became a
Muni like unto Brahman himself. Yayati became a monarch of great prowess
and virtue. He ruled the whole Earth, performed numerous sacrifices,
worshipped the Pitris with great reverence, and always respected the
gods. And he brought the whole world under his sway and was never
vanquished by any foe. And the sons of Yayati were all great bowmen and
resplendent with every virtue. And, O king, they were begotten upon (his
two wives) Devayani and Sarmishtha. And of Devayani were born Yadu and
Turvasu, and of Sarmishtha were born Drahyu, Anu, and Puru. And, O king,
having virtuously ruled his subjects for a long time, Yayati was attacked
with a hideous decrepitude destroying his personal beauty. And attacked
by decrepitude, the monarch then spoke, O Bharata, unto his sons Yadu and
Puru and Turvasu and Drahyu and Anu these words, 'Ye dear sons, I wish to
be a young man and to gratify my appetites in the company of young women.
Do you help me therein.' To him his eldest son born of Devayani then
said, 'What needest thou, O king? Dost thou want to have your youth?'
Yayati then told him, 'Accept thou my decrepitude, O son! With thy youth
I would enjoy myself. During the time of a great sacrifice I have been
cursed by the Muni Usanas (Sukra). O son, I would enjoy myself with your
youth. Take any of you this my decrepitude and with my body rule ye my
kingdom. I would enjoy myself with a renovated body. Therefore, ye my
sons, take ye my decrepitude.' But none of his sons accepted his
decrepitude. Then his youngest son Puru said unto him, 'O king, enjoy
thyself thou once again with a renovated body and returned youth! I shall
take thy decrepitude and at thy command rule thy kingdom.' Thus
addressed, the royal sage, by virtue of his ascetic power then
transferred his own decrepitude unto that high-souled son of his and with
the youth of Puru became a youth; while with the monarch's age Puru ruled
his kingdom.
"Then, after a thousand years had passed away, Yayati, that tiger among
kings, remained as strong and powerful as a tiger. And he enjoyed for a
long time the companionship of his two wives. And in the gardens of
Chitraratha (the king of Gandharvas), the king also enjoyed the company
of the Apsara Viswachi. But even after all this, the great king found his
appetites unsatiated. The king, then recollected the following truths
contained in the Puranas, 'Truly, one's appetites are never satiated by
enjoyment. On the other hand, like sacrificial butter poured into the
fire, they flame up with indulgence. Even if one enjoyed the whole Earth
with its wealth, diamonds and gold, animals and women, one may not yet be
satiated. It is only when man doth not commit any sin in respect of any
living thing, in thought, deed, or speech, it is then that he attaineth
to purity as that of Brahman. When one feareth nothing, when one is not
feared by anything, when one wisheth for nothing, when one injureth
nothing, it is then that one attaineth to the purity of Brahman.' The
wise monarch seeing this and satisfied that one's appetites are never
satiated, set his mind at rest by meditation, and took back from his son
his own decrepitude. And giving him back his youth, though his own
appetites were unsatiated, and installing him on the throne, he spoke
unto Puru thus, 'Thou art my true heir, thou art my true son by whom my
race is to be continued. In the world shall my race be known by thy name.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then that tiger among kings, having installed
his son Puru on the throne, went away to the mount of Bhrigu for devoting
himself to asceticism. And, having acquired great ascetic merit, after
long years, he succumbed to the inevitable influence of Time. He left his
human body by observing the vow of fasting, and ascended to heaven with
his wives.'"
