SECTION LII
"Dhritarashtra said, 'He whom we have never heard to speak a falsehood,
he who hath Dhananjaya to fight for him, may have the sovereignty of even
the three worlds. Reflecting from day to day I do not find the warrior
who may, on his car, advance in battle against the wielder of Gandiva.
When that wielder of Gandiva will shoot winged arrows and Nalikas and
shafts capable of piercing the breast of warriors, there is no rival of
his in battle. If those bulls among men, those heroes,--Drona and
Karna,--those foremost of mighty men, versed in weapons and invincible in
battle, withstand him, the result may be very doubtful, but I am sure
that the victory will not be mine. Karna is both compassionate and
heedless, and preceptor is aged and hath affection for this pupil.
Partha, however, is able and mighty, of firm grasp (of the bow). Terrible
will be the encounter between them, without resulting in any one's
defeat. Conversant with weapons and endued with heroism, all of them have
earned great fame. They may relinquish the very sovereignty of the gods,
but not the chance of winning victory. There would be peace, without
doubt, upon the fall of either of these two (Drona and Karna) or of
Falguna, There is none, however, who can either slay or vanquish Arjuna.
Alas, how may his wrath that hath been excited against my foolish sons be
pacified. Others there are acquainted with the use of weapons, that
conqueror are conquered; but it is heard that Falguna always conquereth.
Three and thirty years have passed away since the time, when Arjuna,
having invited Agni, gratified him at Khandava, vanquishing all the
celestials. We have never heard of his defeat anywhere, O child. Like the
case of Indra, victory is always Arjuna's, who hath for his charioteer in
battle Hrishikesa, endued with the same character and position. We hear
that the two Krishnas on the same car and the stringed Gandiva,--these
three forces,--have been united together. As regards ourselves, we have
not a bow of that kind, or a warrior like Arjuna, or a charioteer like
Krishna. The foolish followers of Duryodhana are not aware of this. O
Sanjaya, the blazing thunderbolt falling on the head leaveth something
undestroyed, but the arrows, O child, shot by Kiritin leave nothing
undestroyed. Even now I behold Dhanajaya shooting his arrows and
committing a havoc around, picking off heads from bodies with his arrowy
showers! Even now I behold the arrowy conflagration, blazing all around,
issuing from the Gandiva, consuming in battle the ranks of my sons. Even
now it seemeth to me that, struck with panic at the rattle of
Savyasachin's car, my vast army consisting of diverse forces is running
away in all directions. As a tremendous conflagration, wandering in all
directions, of swelling flames and urged by the wind, consumeth dry
leaves and grass, so will the great fame of Arjuna's weapons consume all
my troops. Kiritin, appearing as a foe in battle, will vomit innumerable
arrows and become irresistible like all destroying Death urged forward by
the Supreme Ordainer. When I shall constantly hear of evil omens of
diverse kinds happening in the homes of the Kurus. and around them and on
the field of battle, then will destruction, without doubt, overtake the
Bharats.'"
