SECTION LXI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of his father, the passionate
son of Dhritarashtra inflamed with great wrath, again said these words,
of envy, of 'Thou thinkest the Parthas having the celestials for their
allies, are incapable of being vanquished. Let this thy fear, O best of
kings, be dispelled. The gods attained to their divinity for absence of
desire, covetousness, and of enmity, as also for their indifference to
all worldly affairs. Formerly, Dwaipayana-Vyasa and Narada of great
ascetic austerities, and Rama, the son of Jamadagni, told us this. The
gods never like human beings engage in work, O bull of the Bharata race,
from desire, or wrath, or covetousness, or envy. Indeed, if Agni, or
Vayu, or Dharma, or Indra, or the Aswins had ever engaged themselves in
works from worldly desire, then the sons of Pritha could never have
fallen into distress. Do not, therefore, by any means, indulge in such
anxiety, because the gods, O Bharata, always set their eyes on affairs
worthy of themselves. If, however, envy or lust become noticeable in the
gods in consequence of their yielding to desire, then, according to what
has been ordained by the gods themselves, such envy or Just can never
prevail. Charmed by me, Agni will be instantly extinguished, even if he
blazes up all around for consuming all creatures. The energy with which
the gods are endued is, indeed, great, but know, O Bharata, that mine is
greater than that of the gods. If the Earth herself cleaves in twain, or
mountain crests split, I can re-unite them, O king, by my incantations
before the eyes of all. If for the destruction of this universe of
animate and inanimate, mobile and immobile creatures, there happeneth a
terrific tempest or stony shower of loud roar, I can always, from
compassion for created beings, stop it before the eyes of all. When the
waters are solidified by me, even cars and infantry can move over them.
It is I who set agoing all the affairs of both gods and Asuras. Unto
whatever countries I go with my Akshauhinis on any mission, my steeds
move whithersoever I desire. Within my dominions there are no fearful
snakes, and protected by my incantations, creatures within my territories
are never injured by others that are frightful. The very clouds, O king,
pour, as regards those dwelling in my dominions, showers as much as they
desire and when they desire. All my subjects, again, are devoted to
religion and are never subject to calamities of season. The Aswins, Vayu,
Agni, Indra with the Maruts, and Dharma will not venture to protect my
foes. If these had been able to protect by their might my adversaries,
never would the sons of Pritha have fallen into such distress for three
and ten years. I tell thee truly that neither gods, nor Gandharvas nor
Asuras nor Rakshasas are capable of saving him who hath incurred my
displeasure; I have never before been baffled as regards the reward to
punishment that I intended to bestow or inflict on friend or foe. If
ever, O repressor of foes, I said this is to be,--that hath always been.
People, therefore, have always known me as a speaker of truth. All
persons can bear witness to my greatness, the fame of which hath spread
all around. I mention this, O king, for thy information and not from
pride. Never had I, O king, praised myself before, for to praise one's
own self is mean. Thou wilt hear of defeat of the Pandavas and the
Matsyas, the Panchalas and the Kekayas, of Satyaki and Vasudeva, at my
hands. Indeed, as rivers, on entering the ocean, are entirely lost in it,
so the Pandavas with all their followers, on approaching me, will all be
annihilated. My intelligence is superior, my energy is superior, my
prowess is superior, my knowledge is superior, my resources are superior
by far to those of the Pandavas. Whatever knowledge of weapons is in the
Grandsire, in Drona, and Kripa, and Salya, and Shalya, exist in me as
well.
'Having said these words, O Bharata, Duryodhana, that repressor of foes,
again asked Sanjaya, in order to ascertain the proceedings of
Yudhishthira bent upon war.'"
