SECTION LXIII
"Duryodhana said, 'The son of Pritha are all as other men, and are, in
fact, of earthly birth as other men. Why then dost thou think that they
are sure to win victory? Both ourselves and they are equal in energy, in
prowess, in age, in intelligence, in knowledge of the scriptures, in
weapons, in the art of war, in lightness of hand, and in skill. All of us
are of the of same species, all being men by birth. How then, O
grandsire, dost thou know that victory will be theirs? I do not seek the
accomplishment of my aims by relying upon thee, or Drona, or Kripa or
Valhika, or upon the other kings. Myself, and Karna, the son of
Vikartana, and my brother Dussasana, will slay in battle the five sons of
Pandu by sharpened arrows. Then shall we, O king, gratify Brahmanas by
performing great sacrifices of diverse kinds, with abundant Dakshinas,
and by gifts of kine and horses and wealth. When my troops will drag by
the aid of their mighty arms the Pandavas in battle, like hunters
dragging a herd of deer by a net, or whirlpools drawing a crewless boat,
then the sons of Pandu, beholding us their foe, supported by crowds and
cars and elephants, will give up their pride, and not they alone but
Kesava also.' Hearing this, Vidura said, 'Venerable persons of infallible
knowledge say that in this world self-restraint is highly beneficial. In
the case of Brahmana especially, it is his duty. He whose self-restraint
followeth charity, asceticism, knowledge, and study of the Vedas, always
winneth success, forgiveness, and the fruit of his gifts. Self-restraint
enhanceth energy, and is an excellent and holy attribute. Freed from sin
and his energy increased by Self-restraint, one acquireth even Brahma
through it. People are always afraid of those that are without
self-restraint, as if the latter were very Rakshasas. And it is for
keeping these under check that the self-Existent created the Kshatriyas.
It hath been said that Self-restraint is an excellent vow for all the
four modes of life. I regard those attributes as its indications which
woe their origin to self-restraint, Those indications are forgiveness,
firmness of mind, abstention from injury, an equal regard for all things,
truthfulness of speech, simplicity, control over the senses, patience,
gentleness of speech, modesty, steadiness, liberality, mildness,
contentment, and faith, he that hath self-restraint casteth off Just,
avarice, pride, wrath, sleep, boastfulness, self-esteem, malice, and
sorrow. Purity and absence of crookedness and fraud, are the distinctive
marks of a man of self-restraint. He that is not covetous, that is
satisfied with a little, that regardeth not objects provoking lust, and
that is as grave as the ocean, is known as a man of self-restraint. He
that is well-behaved, of good disposition and contented soul, that
knoweth his own self is possessed of wisdom, winneth great regard here
and attaineth to a blissful state hereafter. Possessed of mature wisdom,
he that hath no fear of other creatures and whom other creatures fear
not, is said to be the foremost of men. Seeking the good of all, he is a
universal friend, and no one is made unhappy by him. Endued with gravity,
like that of the ocean and enjoying contentment in consequence of his
wisdom, such a man is always calm and cheerful. Regulating their conduct
according to the acts practised by the righteous olden times and before
their eyes, they that are self-restrained, being devoted to peace,
rejoice in this world. Or, abandoning Action, because contented in
consequence of Knowledge, such a person, with his senses under control
moveth quickly in this world, waiting for the inevitable hour and
absorption into Brahma. And as the track of feathery creatures in the sky
is incapable of being perceived, so the path of the sage enjoying
contentment in consequence of Knowledge is not visible. Abandoning, the
world he that betaketh himself, in pursuit of emancipation, to the
Sannyasa mode of life, hath bright and eternal regions assigned to him in
heaven.'"
