SECTION LIX
Dhritarashtra said, 'Tell me, O thou of great wisdom, what high-souled
Vasudeva and Dhananjaya said. I am anxious to hear from thee all about
this.'
"Sanjaya said, 'Listen, O king, as I tell thee the state in which I found
Krishna and Dhananjaya. I will also, O Bharata, tell thee what those
heroes said; O king, with looks bent down and hands joined together, and
with senses well restrained, I entered the inner apartments for
conferring with those gods among men. Neither Abhimanyu nor the Twins can
repair to that place where are the two Krishnas and Draupadi and lady
Satyabhama. There I beheld those chastisers of foes, exhilarated with
Bassia wine, their bodies adorned with garlands of flowers. Attired in
excellent robes and adorned with celestial ornaments, they sat on a
golden dais, decked with numerous gems, and covered over with carpets of
diverse texture and hue. And I beheld Kesava's feet resting upon Arjuna's
lap while those of the high-souled Arjuna rested upon the laps of Krishna
and Satyabhama. Partha then pointed out to me (for a seat) a foot-stool
made of gold. Touching it with my hand, I seated myself down on the
ground. And when he withdraw his feet from the foot-stool, I beheld
auspicious marks on both his soles. Those consisted of two longitudinal
lines running from heels to fore-toe, O sire, endued with black
complexions, of high statures, and erect like Sala trunks, beholding
those youthful heroes, both seated on the same seat, a great fear seized
me. They seemed to me to be Indra and Vishnu seated together, though
Duryodhana of dull sense knoweth it no consequence of his reliance on
Drona and Bhishma and on the loud vaunts of Karna. That very moment, I
was convinced that the wishes of Yudhishthira the just, who had those two
for obeying his orders, were certain to succeed. Being hospitably
entertained with food and drink, and honoured with other courtesies, I
conveyed to them thy message, placing my joined hands on my head. Then
Partha, removing Kesava's auspicious foot from his lap, with his hand
scarred by the flappings of the bow-string, urged him to speak. Sitting
up erect like Indra's banner, adorned with every ornament, and resembling
Indra himself in energy, Krishna then addressed me. And the words which
that best of speakers said were sweet, charming and mild, though awful
and alarming to the son of Dhritarashtra. Indeed, the words uttered by
Krishna, who alone is fit to speak, were of correct emphasis and accent,
and pregnant with meaning, though heart-rending in the end. And Vasudeva
said, 'O Sanjaya, say thou these words unto the wise Dhritarashtra and in
the hearing of that foremost of the Kurus, Bhishma, and also of Drona,
having first saluted at our request, O Suta, all the aged ones and hawing
enquired after the welfare of the younger ones, 'Do ye celebrate diverse
sacrifices, making presents unto the Brahmanas, and rejoice with your
sons and wives, for a great danger threatens ye? Do ye give away wealth
unto deserving persons, beget desirable sons, and do agreeable offices to
those that are dear to thee, for king Yudhishthira is eager for victory?'
While I was at a distance, Krishna with tears addressing me said, 'That
debt, accumulating with time, hath not yet been paid off by me. Ye have
provoked hostilities with that Savyasachin, who hath for his bow the
invincible Gandiva, of fiery energy, and who hath me for his helpmate.
Who, even if he were Purandara himself, would challenge Partha having me
for his help-mate, unless, of course, his span of life were full? He that
is capable of vanquishing Arjuna in battle is, indeed, able to uphold the
Earth with his two arms, to consume all created things in anger and hurl
the celestials from Heaven. Among the celestials, Asuras, and men, among
Yakshas, Gandharvas, and Nagas, I do not find the person that can
encounter Arjuna in battle. That wonderful story which is heard of an
encounter in the city of Virata between a single person on one side and
innumerable warriors on the other, is sufficient proof of this. That ye
all fled in all directions being routed in the city of Virata by that son
of Pandu singly, is sufficient proof of this. Might, prowess, energy,
speed, lightness of hand, indefatiguableness, and patience are not to be
found in any one else save Partha.' Thus spoke Hrishikesa cheering up
Partha by his words and roaring like rain-charged clouds in the
firmament. Having heard these words of Kesava, the diadem-decked Arjuna,
of white steeds, also spoke to the same effect.'"
