SECTION LXXVI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by Vasudeva, the ever-wrathful Bhima,
incapable of bearing insults, was immediately awakened like a steed of
high metal, and replied, without losing a moment, saying, 'O Achyuta, I
wish to act in a particular way; thou, however, takest me in quite a
different light. That I take great delight in war and that my prowess is
incapable of being baffled, must, O Krishna. be well-known to thee in
consequence of our having lived together for a long time. Or it may be,
thou knowest me not, like one swimming in a lake ignorant of its depth.
It is for this that thou chidest me in such unbecoming words. Who else, O
Madhava, knowing me to be Bhimasena, could address me with such
unbecoming words as thou dost? Therefore, I shall tell thee, O delighter
of the Vrishnis, about my own prowess and unrivalled might. Although to
speak of one's own prowess is always an ignoble act, yet, pierced as I am
by thy unfriendly strictures, I will speak of my own might. Behold, O
Krishna, these--the firmament and the earth--which are immovable,
immense, and infinite, and which are the refuge of, and in which are born
these countless creatures. If through anger these suddenly collide like
two hills, just I, with my arms, can keep them asunder with all their
mobile and immobile objects. Behold the joints of these my mace-like
arms. I find not the person who can extricate himself having once come
within their grasp. The Himavat, the ocean, the mighty wielder of the
thunderbolt himself, viz., the slayer of Vala,--even these three cannot,
with all their power extricate the person attacked by me. I will easily
trample on the ground under my feet all the Kshatriyas, who will come to
battle against the Pandavas. It is not known to thee, O Achyuta, with
what prowess I vanquished the kings of the earth and brought them under
subjection. If, indeed, thou really knowest not my prowess which is like
the fierce energy of the midday sun thou wilt then know it, O Janardana,
in the fierce melee of battle. Thou woundest me with thy cruel words,
paining me with the pain of opening a foetid tumour. But know me to be
mightier than what I have said of myself of my own accord. On that day,
when the fierce and destructive havoc of battle will begin, thou will
then see me felling elephants and car-warriors combatants on steeds and
those on elephants, and slaying in rage the foremost of Kshatriya
warriors. Thou, as well as others, wilt see me doing all this and
grinding down the foremost of combatants. The marrow of my bones hath not
yet decayed, nor doth my heart tremble. If the whole world rusheth
against me in wrath, I do not yet feel the influence of fear. It is only
for the sake of compassion, O slayer of Madhu, that I am for displaying
goodwill to the foe. I am far quietly bearing all our injuries, lest the
Bharata race be extirpated.'"
