SECTION LXVIII
"Sanjaya said, 'Those adorable bowmen, Arjuna and Vasudeva, who are
perfectly equal unto each other in respect of their godlike nature, have
taken their births of their own will. O lord, the discus owned by
Vasudeva, of abundant energy, occupieth a space full five cubits in
diameter, is capable also of being hurled at the foe (in forms large or
small) according to the will of the wielder himself, and it dependeth on
illusion. Always conspicuous by its effulgence, it is invisible to the
Kurus; and in ascertaining the strength or weakness of the Pandavas, that
discus offers the best ground. Indeed, that scion of Madhu's race, endued
with great might, vanquished with an effort and in seeming playfulness
the formidable Naraka and Samvara and Kansa and (Sisupala) the chief of
Chedis. Possessed of divinity and of soul superior to everything, that
most exalted of male beings can, by his will alone, bring the earth,
firmament, and heaven under his control. Thou askest me repeatedly, O
king, about the Pandavas for knowing their strength and weakness. Listen
now to all that in brief. If the whole universe be placed on one scale
and Janardana on the other, even then Janardana will outweigh the entire
universe. Janardana, at his pleasure, can reduce the universe to ashes,
but the entire universe is incapable of reducing Janardana to ashes.
Wherever there is truthfulness, wherever virtue, wherever modesty,
wherever simplicity, even there is Govinda. And thither where Krishna is,
success must be. That soul of all creatures, most exalted of male beings,
Janardana, guideth, as if in sport, the entire earth, the firmament, and
the heaven. Making the Pandavas the indirect means, and beguiling the
whole world. Janardana wisheth to blast thy wicked sons that are all
addicted to sin. Endued with divine attributes, Kesava, by the power of
his soul causeth the wheel of Time, the wheel of the Universe, and the
wheel of the Yuga, to revolve incessantly. And I tell thee truly that
glorious Being is alone the Lord of Time, of Death, and of this Universe
of mobile and immobile objects. That great ascetic Hari, though the Lord
of the whole Universe, still betaketh himself to work, like a humble
labourer that tilleth the fields. Indeed, Kesava beguileth all by the aid
of His illusion. Those men, however, that have attained to Him are not
deceived.'"
