SECTION LXXI
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O Sanjaya, I envy those gifted with sight, who will
behold before them that Vasudeva whose body endued with great beauty
shineth with effulgence, illuminating the cardinal and subsidiary points
of the compass; who will give utterance to words that will be listened to
with respect by the Bharatas,--words that are auspicious to the
Srinjayas, acceptable, by those desirous of prosperity, faultless in
every respect, and unacceptable by those that are doomed to death; who is
full of high resolves, eternal, possessed of unrivalled heroism, who is
the bull of the Yadavas and their leader, and who is the slayer and
awe-inspirer of all foes, and who is the destroyer of the fame of every
enemy? The assembled Kauravas will behold that high-souled and adorable
One, that slayer of foes, that chief of the Vrishnis, uttering words full
of kindness, and fascinating all of my party. I put myself in the hand of
that Eternal one, that Rishi endued with knowledge of Self, that ocean of
eloquence, that Being who is easily attainable by ascetics, that bird
called Arishta furnished with beautiful wings, that destroyer of
creatures, that refuge of the universe; that one of a thousand heads,
that Creator and Destroyer of all things, that Ancient one, that one
without beginning, middle, or end, that one of infinite achievements,
that cause of the Prime seed, that unborn one, that Eternity's self, that
highest of the high, that Creator of the three worlds, that Author of
gods, Asuras, Nagas, and Rakshasas, that foremost of all learned persons
and rulers of men, that younger brother of Indra.'"
