SECTION LXXIII
"The holy one said, 'I have heard Sanjaya's words and now I have heard
thine. I know all about his purposes as also of thyself. Thy heart
inclineth to righteousness, whereas their inclination is towards enmity.
That which is obtained without war is of great value to thee. A long-life
Brahmacharya is not, O lord of earth, the duty of a Kshatriya. Indeed,
men of all the four orders have said that a Kshatriya should never
subsist on alms; victory or death in battle, hath been eternally ordained
by the Creator; even that is the duty of a Kshatriya. Cowardice is not
applauded (in a Kshatriya). Subsistence, O Yudhishthira, is not possible
by Cowardice, O thou of mighty arms. Display thy prowess, and vanquish, O
chastiser of foes, thy enemies. The covetous son of Dhritarashtra, O
chastiser of foes, living for a long time (with many kings) has by
affection and friendship become very powerful. Therefore, O king, there
is no hope of making his peace with thee. They regard themselves strong,
having Bhishma and Drona and Kripa and others with them. As long, O king,
as thou, O grinder of foes, wilt behave with them mildly, they will
withhold thy kingdom. Neither from compassion, nor from mildness, nor
from a sense of righteousness, will the sons of Dhritarashtra, O
chastiser of foes, fulfil thy wishes. This, O son of Pandu, is another
proof that they will not make peace with thee. Having pained thee so
deeply by making thee put on a Kaupina, they were not stung with remorse.
In the very sight of the Grandsire (Bhishma) and Drona and the wise
Vidura, of many holy Brahmanas, the king, the citizens, and all the chief
Kauravas, the cruel Duryodhana, deceitfully defeating thee at dice,--thee
that are charitable, gentle, self-restrained, virtuous, and of rigid vows
was not, O king, ashamed of his vile act. Do not, O monarch, show any
compassion for that wretch of such disposition. They deserve death at the
hands of all, how much more then of thee, O Bharata? O Bharata, with what
improper speeches did Duryodhana with his brothers, filled with gladness
and indulging in many a boast, afflict thee with thy brothers! He said,
'The Pandavas now have nothing of their own in this wide earth. Their
very names and lineage are extinct. In time, which is never-ending,
defeat will be theirs. All their virtues having merged in me, they will
now be reduced to the five elements.' While the match at dice was in
progress, the wretched Dussasana of most wicked soul, seizing that
weeping lady by the hair dragged princess Draupadi, as if she had no
protectors, to the assembly of kings, and in the presence of Bhishma and
Drona and others, repeatedly called her--cow, cow! Restrained by thee,
thy brothers of terrible prowess, bound also by the bonds of virtue, did
nothing to avenge it; and after thou hadst been exiled to the woods,
Duryodhana having uttered such and other cruel words, boasted amid his
kinsmen. Knowing thee innocent, they that were assembled sat silent in
the assembly-house, weeping with choked voice. The assembled kings with
the Brahmanas did not applaud him for this. Indeed, all the courtiers
present there censured him. To a man of noble descent, O grinder of foes,
even censure is death. Death is even many times better than a life of
blame. Even then, O king, he died when, upon being censured by all the
kings of the earth, he felt no shame! He whose character is so abominable
may easily be destroyed even like a rootless tree standing erect on a
single weak root. The sinful and evil-minded Duryodhana deserveth death
at the hands of every one, even like a serpent. Slay him, therefore, O
killer of foes, and hesitate not in the least. It behoveth thee, O
sinless one, and I like it too, that thou shouldst pay homage unto thy
father Dhritarashtra and also unto Bhishma. Going thither I will remove
the doubts of all men who are still undecided as to the wickedness of
Duryodhana. Thither in the presence of all kings I will enumerate all
those virtues of thine that are not to be met in all men, as also all the
vices of Duryodhana. And hearing me speak beneficial words, pregnant with
virtue and profit, the rulers of various realms will regard thee as
possessed of a virtuous soul, and as a speaker of truth, while at the
same time, they will understand how Duryodhana is actuated by avarice. I
will also tell the vice of Duryodhana, before both the citizens and the
inhabitants of the country, before both the young and the old, of all the
four orders that will be collected there. And as thou askest for peace no
one will charge thee sinful, while all the chiefs of the earth will
censure the Kurus and Dhritarashtra; and when Duryodhana will be dead in
consequence of his being forsaken by all men, there will be nothing left
to do. Do then what should now be done. Going unto the Kurus, I shall
strive to make peace without sacrificing thy interests, and marking their
inclination for war and all their proceedings, I will soon come back, O
Bharata, for thy victory. I think war with the enemy to be certain. All
the omens that are noticeable by me point to that. Birds and animals set
up frightful screeches and howls at the approach of dusk. The foremost of
elephants and steeds assume horrible shapes; the very fire exhibiteth
diverse kinds of terrible hues! This would never have been the case but
for the fact of the world-destroying Havoc's self coming into our midst!
Making ready their weapons, machines, coats of mail, and cars, elephants,
and steeds, let all thy warriors be prepared for battle, and let them
take care of their elephants and horses and cars. And, O king, collect
everything that thou needest for the impending war. As long as he liveth,
Duryodhana will, by no means, be able to give back unto thee. O king,
that kingdom of thine which, abounding in prosperity, have before been
taken by him at dice!'"
