SECTION LXVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'When Duryodhana, the son of Dhritarashtra, showed
little regard for the words spoken by Sanjaya, and when the rest remained
silent, the assembled kings rose up and retired. And after all the kings
of the earth had retired, king Dhritarashtra, who always followed the
counsels of his son from affection, wishing success to the assembled
kings, began to enquire in secret of Sanjaya about the resolve of his own
party, and of the Pandavas who were hostile to him. And Dhritarashtra
said, 'Tell me truly, O son of Gavalgana, in what consists the strength
and weakness of our own host, Minutely acquainted as thou art with the
affairs of the Pandavas, tell me in what lies their superiority and in
what, their inferiority. Thou are fully conversant with the strength of
both parties, Thou knowest all things, and art well-versed in all matters
of virtue and profit. Asked by me, O Sanjaya, say which of the parties,
when engaged in battle, will perish?'
"Sanjaya said, 'I will not say anything to thee in secret, O king, for
then thou mayst entertain ill-feelings towards me. Bring thou hither, O
Ajamida, thy father Vyasa of high vows and thy queen Gandhari. Conversant
with morality, of keen perception, and capable of arriving at the truth,
they will remove any ill-feelings thou mayst cherish against me. In their
presence, O king, I will tell thee everything about the intensions of
Kesava and Partha.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, Dhritarashtra caused both
Gandhari and Vyasa to be brought there. And introduced by Vidura they
entered the court without delay. And understanding the intentions of both
Sanjaya and his son, Krishna-Dwaipayana endued with great wisdom said,
'Say, O Sanjaya, unto the enquiring Dhritarashtra everything that he
desireth to know. Tell him truly all that thou knowest about Vasudeva and
Arjuna.'"
