SECTION LXXX
"Nakula said, 'Much hath been said, O Madhava, by king Yudhishthira the
just who is conversant with morality and endued with liberality, and thou
hast heard what hath been said by Falguni also. As regards my own
opinion, O hero, thou hast repeatedly expressed it, Hearing first what
the wishes of the enemy are and disregarding all, do what thou regardest
to be proper for the occasion. O Kesava, diverse are the conclusions
arrived at as regards diverse matters. Success, however, O chastiser of
foes, is won when a man doth that which ought to be done in view of the
occasion. When a thing is settled in one way on one occasion, it becometh
unsuitable when the occasion becometh different. Persons, therefore, in
this world, O foremost of men, cannot stick to the same opinion
throughout. While we were living in the woods, our hearts were inclined
towards a particular course of action. While we were passing the period
of concealment, our wishes were of one kind, and now, at the present
time, O Krishna, when concealment is no longer necessary, our wishes have
become different. O thou of the Vrishni race, while we wandered in the
woods, attachment for the kingdom was not so great as now. The period of
our exile having ceased, hearing, O hero, that we have returned, an army
numbering full seven Akshauhinis hath, through thy grace, O Janardana,
been assembled. Beholding these tigers among men, of inconceivable might
and prowess, standing equipped for battle armed with weapons, what man is
there that will not be struck with fear? Therefore going into the midst
of the Kurus, speak thou first words fraught with mildness and then those
fraught with threats, so that the wicked Suyodhana may be agitated with
fear. What mortal man is there, of flesh and blood, who would encounter
in battle Yudhishthira and Bhimasena, the invincible Vibhatsu and
Sahadeva, myself, thyself and Rama, O Kesava, and Satyaki of mighty
energy. Virata with his sons, Drupada with his allies, and
Dhrishtadyumna, O Madhava, and the ruler of Kasi of great prowess and
Dhrishtaketu the lord of the Chedis? No sooner wilt thou go there than
thou wilt, without doubt, accomplish, O thou of mighty arms, the desired
object of king Yudhishthira the just. Vidura, and Bhishma and Drona and
Vahlika, these talents, O sinless one, will understand thee when thou
wouldst utter words of wisdom. They will solicit that ruler of men,
Dhritarashtra and Suyodhana of sinful disposition, with his counsellors,
to act according to the advice. When thou, O Janardana, art the speaker
and Vidura the listener, what subject is there that cannot be rendered
smooth and plain?'"
