SECTION LXXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing the peaceful words of the king that were
fraught with both virtue and profit, king Drupada's daughter Krishna, of
long black tresses, afflicted with great grief, applauding Sahadeva and
that mighty car-warrior Satyaki, addressed Madhava seated by his side.
And beholding Bhimasena declare for peace, that intelligent lady,
overwhelmed with woe and with eyes bathed in tears, said, 'O slayer of
Madhu, it is known to thee, O thou of mighty arms, by what deceitful
means, O righteous one, the son of Dhritarashtra with his counsellors
robbed the Pandavas, O Janardana. of their happiness. Thou knowest also,
O thou of Dasarha's race, what message was privately delivered to Sanjaya
by the king. Thou hast also heard all that was said unto Sanjaya. O thou
of great effulgence, these words were even these, 'Let only five villages
be granted to us, viz., Avishthala, and Vrikasthala, and Makandi, and
Varanavata, and for the fifth, any other,--O thou of mighty arms, O
Kesava, even this was the message that was to have been delivered to
Duryodhana and his counsellors. But, O Krishna, O thou of Dasarha's race,
hearing those words of Yudhishthira, endued with modesty and anxious for
peace, Suyodhana hath not acted according to them. If, O Krishna,
Suyodhana desireth to make peace without surrendering the kingdom, there
is no necessity of going thither for making such a peace. The Pandavas
with the Srinjayas, O thou of mighty arms, are quite able to withstand
the fierce Dhritarashtra host inflamed with rage. When they are no longer
amenable to this arts of conciliation, it is not proper, O slayer of
Madhu, that thou shouldst show them mercy. Those enemies, O Krishna, with
whom peace cannot be established by either conciliation or presents,
should be treated with severity by one desirous of saving his life.
Therefore, O mighty-armed Achyuta, heavy should be the punishment that
deserves to be speedily inflicted upon them by thyself aided by the
Pandavas and the Srinjayas. Indeed, even this would become the son of
Pritha, and add to thy glory, and if accomplished, will, O Krishna, be a
source of great happiness to the whole Kshatriya race. He that is
covetous, whether belonging to the Kshatriya or any other order, save of
course a Brahmana, even if most sinful, ought surely to be slain by a
Kshatriya, who is true to the duties of his own order. The exception in
the case of a Brahmana, O sire, is due to a Brahmana's being the
preceptor of all the other orders, as also the first sharer of
everything. Persons conversant with the scriptures declare, O Janardana,
that sin is incurred in slaying one that deserveth not to be slain. So
there is equal sin in not slaying one that deserveth to be slain. Act
thou, therefore, O Krishna, in such a way with the forces of the Pandavas
and the Srinjayas, that sin may not touch thee. From excess of confidence
in thee, O Janardana, I will repeat what hath been said again and again.
Whatever woman, O Kesava, is there on earth like me? I am the daughter of
king Drupada, risen from the sacrificial alter. I am the sister of
Dhrishtadyumna, thy dear friend, O Krishna. I have by marriage become a
lady of Ajamida's race,--the daughter-in-law of the illustrious Pandu. I
am the queen of Pandu's sons, who resemble five Indras in splendour. I
have, by these five heroes, five sons that are all mighty car-warriors,
and that are morally bound to thee, O Krishna, as Abhimanyu himself.
Being such, O Krishna, I was seized by the hair, dragged into the
assembly and insulted in the very sight of the sons of Pandu and in thy
life-time. O Kesava, the sons of Pandu, the Panchalas, and the Vrishnis
being all alive, exposed to the gaze of the assembly I was treated as a
slave by those sinful wretches. And when the Pandavas beholding it all
sat silent without giving way to wrath, in my heart I called upon thee. O
Govinda, saying,--Save me, O save me!--Then the illustrious king
Dhritarashtra, my father-in-law, said unto me, 'Ask thou any boon, O
princess of Panchala. Thou deservest boons and even honour at my hands.'
Thus addressed I said, 'Let the Pandavas be free men with their cars and
weapons.' Upon this the Pandavas, O Kesava, were freed but only to be
exiled into the woods. O Janardana, thou knowest all these sorrows of
mine. Rescue me, O lotus-eyed one, with my husbands, kinsmen, and
relatives, from that grief. Morally, O Krishna, I am the daughter-in-law
of both Bhishma and Dhritarashtra. Though such, I was yet forcibly made a
slave. Fie to Partha's bowmanship, oh, fie to Bhimasena's might since
Duryodhana, O Krishna, liveth for even a moment. If I deserve any favour
at thy hands, if thou hast any compassion for me, let thy wrath, O
Krishna, be directed towards the sons of Dhritarashtra.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said this, the beautiful Krishna of eyes
that were black in hue and large like lotus leaves, bathed in tears, and
walking like a cow-elephant, approached the lotus-eyed Krishna, and
taking with her left hand her own beautiful tresses of curly ends,
deep-blue in hue and scented with every perfume, endued with every
auspicious mark, and though gathered into a braid, yet soft and glossy
like a mighty snake, spake these words, 'Lotus-eyed one that art anxious
for peace with the enemy, thou shouldst, in all thy acts, call to thy
mind these tresses of mine seized by Dussasana's rude hands! If Bhima and
Arjuna, O Krishna, have become so low as to long for peace, my aged
father then with his war like sons will avenge for me in battle. My five
sons also that are endued with great energy, with Abhimanyu, O slayer of
Madhu, at their head, will fight with the Kauravas. What peace can this
heart of mine know unless I behold Dussasana's dark arm severed from his
trunk and pulverised to atoms? Thirteen long years have I passed in
expectation of better times, hiding in my heart my wrath like a
smouldering fire. And now pierced by Bhima's wordy darts that heart cf
mine is about to break, for the mighty-armed Bhima now casteth his eye on
morality. Uttering these words with voice choked in tears, the large-eyed
Krishna began to weep aloud, with convulsive sobs, and tears gushed down
her cheeks. And that lady, with hips full and round, began to drench her
close and deep bosom by the tears she shed which were hot as liquid fire.
The mighty-armed Kesava then spoke, comforting her in these words, 'Soon
wilt thou, O Krishna, behold the ladies of Bharata's race weep as thou
dost. Even they, O timid one, will weep like thee, their kinsmen and
friends being slain. They with whom, O lady, thou art angry, have their
kinsmen and warriors already slain. With Bhima and Arjuna and the twins,
at Yudhishthira's command, and agreeably to fate, and what hath been
ordained by the Ordainer, I will accomplish all this. Their hour having
arrived, the sons of Dhritarashtra, if they do not listen to my words,
will surely lie down on the earth turned as morsels of dogs and jackals.
The mountains of Himavat might shift their site, the Earth herself might
spilt into a hundred fragments, the firmament itself with its myriads of
stars might fall down, still my words can never be futile. Stop thy
tears, I swear to thee, O Krishna, soon wilt thou see thy husbands, with
their enemies slain, and with prosperity crowning them.'"
