SECTION LXXIX
"The holy one said, 'It shall be, O thou of mighty arms, what thou, O
Pandavas, sayest, I will strive to bring about that which would be
beneficial to both the Pandavas and the Kurus. Between the two kinds of
acts, war and peace, the latter, O Vibhatsu, is perhaps within my power.
Behold, the soil is moistened and divested of weeds by human exertion.
Without rain, however, O son of Kunti, is never yieldeth crops. Indeed,
in the absence of rain some speak of artificial irrigation, as a means of
success due to human exertion, but even then it may be seen that the
water artificially let in is dried up in consequence of providential
drought. Beholding all this, the wise men of old have said that human
affairs are set agoing in consequence of the cooperation of both
providential and human expedients. I will do all that can be done by
human exertion at its best. But I shall, by no means, be able to control
what is providential. The wicked-souled Duryodhana acteth, defying both
virtue and the world. Nor doth he feel any regret in consequence of his
acting in that way. Moreover, his sinful inclinations are fed by his
counsellors Sakuni and Karna and his brother Dussasana. Suyodhana will
never make peace by giving up the kingdom, without, O Partha, undergoing
at our hands a wholesale destruction with his kinsmen. King Yudhishthira
the just doth not wish to give up the kingdom submissively. The
wicked-minded Duryodhana also will not at our solicitation surrender the
kingdom. I, therefore, think that it is scarcely proper to deliver
Yudhishthira's message to him. The sinful Duryodhana of Kuru's race will
not, O Bharata, accomplish the objects spoken of by Yudhishthira. If he
refuses compliance, he will deserve death at the hands of all. Indeed, he
deserves death at my hands, as also, O Bharata, of every one since in
your childhood he always persecuted you all, and since that wicked and
sinful wretch robbed you of your kingdom and could not bear the sight of
Yudhishthira's prosperity. Many a time, O Partha, he strove to withdraw
me from thee, but I never reckoned those wicked attempts of his. Thou
knowest, O thou of mighty arms, what the cherished intentions of
Duryodhana are, and thou knowest also that I seek the welfare of king
Yudhishthira the just. Knowing, therefore, Duryodhana's heart and what my
most cherished wishes are, why then dost thou, O Arjuna, entertain such
apprehensions in respect of myself like one unacquainted with everything?
That grave act also which was ordained in heaven is known to thee, How
then, O Partha, can peace be concluded with the foe? What, however, O
Pandavas, is capable of being done by either speech or act, will all be
done by me. Do not, however, O Partha, expect peace to be possible with
the foe. About a year ago, on the occasion of attacking Virata's kine,
did not Bhishma, on their way back, solicit Duryodhana about this very
peace so beneficial to all? Believe me, they have been defeated even then
when their defeat was resolved by thee. Indeed, Suyodhana doth not
consent to part with the smallest portion of the kingdom for even the
shortest period of time. As regards myself, I am ever obedient to the
commands of Yudhishthira, and, therefore, the sinful acts of that wicked
wretch must have again to be revolved in my mind!'"
