SECTION LXXXIII
"Arjuna said, 'Thou art now, O Kesava, the best friend of all the Kurus.
Related with both the parties, thou art the dear friend of both. It
behoveth thee to bring about peace between the Pandavas and the sons of
Dhritarashtra. Thou, O Kesava, art competent and, therefore, it behoveth
thee to bring about a reconciliation. O lotus-eyed one, proceeding hence
for peace, O slayer of foes, say unto our ever-wrathful brother
Suyodhana, what, indeed, should be said, 'If the foolish Duryodhana doth
not accept thy auspicious and beneficial counsels fraught with virtue and
profit, he will surely then be the victim of his fate.'
"The holy one said, 'Yes, I will go to king Dhritarashtra, desirous of
accomplishing what is consistent with righteousness, what may be
beneficial to us, and what also is for the good of the Kurus.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The night having passed away, a bright sun
arose in the east. The hour called Maitra set in, and the rays of the sun
were still mild. The month was (Kaumuda Kartika) under the constellation
Revati. It was the season of dew, Autumn having departed. The earth was
covered with abundant crops all around. It was at such a time that
Janardana, the foremost of mighty persons, in enjoyment of excellent
health, having heard the auspicious, sacred-sounding and sweet words of
gratified Brahmanas, like Vasava himself hearing the adorations of the
(celestial) Rishis,--and having also gone through the customary acts and
rites of the morning, purified himself by a bath, and decked his person
with unguents and ornaments, worshipped both the Sun and Fire. And having
touched the tail of a bull and reverently bowed to the Brahmanas, walked
round the sacred fire, and cast his eyes on the (usual) auspicious
articles placed in view, Janardana recollected Yudhishthira's word and
addressed Sini's grandson Satyaki, seated near, saying, 'Let my car be
made ready and let my conch and discus along with my mace, and quivers
and darts and all kinds of weapons, offensive and defensive, be placed on
it, for Duryodhana and Karna and Suvala's son are all of wicked souls,
and foes, however contemptible, should never be disregarded by even a
powerful person. Understanding the wishes of Kesava, the wielder of the
discus and the mace, his attendants immediately addressed themselves to
yoke his car. And that car resembled in effulgence the fire that shows
itself at the time of the universal dissolution, and itself in speed. And
it was provided with two wheels that resembled the sun and the moon in
lustre. And it bore emblazonments of moons, both crescent and full, and
of fishes, animals, and birds and it was adorned with garlands of diverse
flowers and with pearls and gems of various kinds all around. And endued
with the splendour of the rising sun, it was large and handsome. And
variegated with gems and gold, it was furnished with an excellent
flag-staff bearing beautiful pennons. And well-supplied with every
necessary article, and incapable of being resisted by the foe, it was
covered with tiger-skins, and capable of robbing the fame of every foe,
it enhanced the joy of the Yadavas. And they yoked unto it those
excellent steeds named Saivya and Sugriva and Meghapushpa and Valahaka,
after these had been bathed and attired in beautiful harness. And
enhancing the dignity of Krishna still further, Garuda, the lord of the
feathery creation, came and perched on the flag-staff of that car
producing a terrible rattle. And Saurin then mounted on that car, high as
the summit of the Meru, and producing a rattle, deep and loud as the
sound of the kettle-drum or the clouds and which resembled the celestial
car coursing at the will of the rider. And taking Satyaki also upon it,
that best of male beings set out, filling the earth and the welkin with
the rattle of his chariot-wheels. And the sky became cloudless, and
auspicious winds began to blow around, and the atmosphere freed from the
dust became pure. Indeed, as Vasudeva set out, auspicious animals and
birds, whirling by the right side, began to follow him, and cranes and
peacocks and swans all followed the slayer of Madhu, uttering cries of
good omens. The very fire, fed with Homa libations in accompaniment with
Mantras, freed from smoke blazed up cheerfully, sending forth its flames
towards the right. And Vasishtha and Vamadeva, and Bhuridyumna and Gaya,
and Kratha and Sukra and Kusika and Bhrigu, and other Brahmarshis and
celestial Rishis united together, all stood on the right side of Krishna,
that delighter of the Yadavas, that younger brother of Vasava. And thus
worshipped by those and other illustrious Rishis and holy men, Krishna
set out for the residence of the Kurus. And while Krishna was proceeding,
Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, followed him, as also Bhima and Arjuna
and those other Pandavas, viz., the twin sons of Madri. And the valiant
Chekitana and Dhrishtaketu, the ruler of the Chedis, and Drupada and the
king of Kasi and that mighty car-warrior Sikhandin, and Dhrishtadyumna,
and Virata with his sons, and the princes of Kekaya also,--all these
Kshatriyas followed that bull of the Kshatriya race to honour him. And
the illustrious king Yudhishthira the just, having followed Govinda to
some distance, addressed him in these words in the presence of all those
kings. And the son of Kunti embraced that foremost of all persons, who
never, from desire, or anger, or fear, or purpose of gain committed the
least wrong, whose mind was ever steady, who was a stranger to
covetousness, who was conversant with morality and endued with great
intelligence and wisdom, who knew the hearts of all creatures and was the
lord of all, who was the God of gods, who was eternal, who was possessed
of every virtue, and who bore the auspicious mark on his breast. And
embracing him the king began to indicate what he was to do.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'That lady who hath brought us from our infancy; who
is ever engaged in facts and ascetic penances and propitiatory rites and
ceremonies; who is devoted to the worship of the gods and guests; who is
always engaged in waiting upon her superiors who is fond of her sons,
bearing for them an affection that knows no bounds; who, O Janardana, is
dearly loved by us; who, O grinder of foes, repeatedly saved us from the
snares of Suyodhana, like a boat saving a ship-wrecked crew from the
frightful terrors of the sea; and who, O Madhava, however undeserving of
woe herself, hath on our account endured countless sufferings,--should be
asked about her welfare-Salute and embrace, and, oh, comfort her over and
over, overwhelmed with grief as she is on account of her sons by talking
of the Pandavas. Ever since her marriage she hath been the victim,
however undeserving, of sorrow and griefs due to the conduct of her
father-in-law, and suffering hath been her position. Shall I, O Krishna,
ever see the time when, O chastiser of foes, my afflictions being over, I
shall be able to make my sorrowing mother happy? On the eve of our exile,
from affection for her children, she ran after us in anguish, crying
bitterly. But leaving her behind, we went into the woods. Sorrow doth not
necessarily kill. It is possible, therefore, that she is alive, being
hospitably entertained by the Anartas, though afflicted with sorrow on
account of her sons. O glorious Krishna, salute her for me, the Kuru king
Dhritarashtra also, and all those monarchs who are senior to us in age,
and Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, and king Vahlika, and Drona's son and
Somadatta, and in fact, every one of the Bharata race, and also Vidura
endued with great wisdom, that counsellor of the Kurus, of profound
intellect and intimate acquaintance with morality,--should all, O slayer
of Madhu, be embraced by thee!' Having in the presence of the kings, said
these words unto Kesava, Yudhishthira, with Krishna's permission, came
back having at first walked round him. Then Arjuna, proceeding a few
steps, further said unto his friend, that bull among men, that slayer of
hostile heroes, that invincible warrior of Dasarha's race, 'It is known
to all the kings, O illustrious Govinda, that at our consultation it was
settled that we should ask back the kingdom. If without insulting us, if
honouring thee, they honestly give us what we demand, then, O mighty
armed one, they would please me greatly and would themselves escape a
terrible danger. If, however, Dhritarashtra's son, who always adopts
improper means, acts otherwise, then I shall surely, O Janardana,
annihilate the Kshatriya race.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'When Arjuna said these words, Vrikodara was
filled with delight. And that son of Pandu continually quivered with
rage; and while still quivering with rage and the delight that filled his
heart upon hearing Dhananjaya's words, he set forth a terrible shout. And
hearing that shout of his, all the bowmen trembled in fear and steeds and
elephants were seen to pass urine and excreta. And having addressed
Kesava then and informed him of his resolution. Arjuna with Janardana's
permission, came back, having first embraced him. And after all the kings
had desisted following him, Janardana set out with a cheerful heart on
his car drawn by Saivya, Sugriva, and others. And those steeds of
Vasudeva, urged by Daruka, coursed onwards, devouring the sky and
drinking the road. And on his way Kesava of mighty arms met with some
Rishis blazing with Brahmic lustre, standing on both sides of the road,
And soon alighting from his car, Janardana saluted them reverently. And
worshipping them duly, he enquired of them, saying, 'Is there peace in
all the world? Is virtue being duly practised? And the other three orders
obedient to the Brahmanas? And having duly worshipped them, the slayer of
Madhu again said, 'Where have ye been crowned with success? Whither would
ye go, and for what object? What also shall I do for yourselves? What has
brought your illustrious selves down on the earth?' Thus addressed,
Jamadagni's son, the friend of Brahma--that lord of both gods and
Asuras,--approached Govinda the slayer of Madhu, embraced him, and said,
'The celestial Rishis of pious deeds, and Brahmanas of extensive
acquaintance with the scriptures, and royal sages, O Dasarha, and
venerable ascetic,--these witnesses, O illustrious one, of the former
feats of gods and Asuras,--are desirous of beholding all the Kshatriyas
of the earth assembled from every side as also the counsellors sitting in
the assembly, the kings, and thyself the embodiment of truth, O
Janardana. O Kesava, we will go thither for beholding that grand sight.
We are also anxious, O Madhava, to listen to those words fraught with
virtue and profit, which will be spoken by thee, O chastiser of foes,
unto the Kurus in the presence of all the kings. Indeed, Bhishma, and
Drona, and others, as also the illustrious Vidura and thyself, O tiger
among the Yadavas,--Ye all will be assembled together in conclave! We
desire, O Madhava, to hear the excellent, truthful, and beneficial words
that thou wilt utter and they also, O Govinda. Thou art now informed of
our purpose, O thou of mighty arms. We will meet thee again. Go thither
safely, O hero. We hope to see thee in the midst of the conclave, seated
on an excellent seat mustering all thy energy and might.'"
