SECTION LXXXVI
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O Vidura, Janardana hath set out from Upaplavya. He
is now staying at Vrikasthala and will come here tomorrow. Janardana is
the leader of the Ahukas, the foremost person amongst all the members of
the Sattwata race, is high-souled, and endued with great energy and great
might. Indeed, Madhava is the guardian and protector of the Prosperous
kingdom of Vrishnis and is the illustrious Great-Grandsire of even the
three worlds. The Vrishnis adore the wisdom of the intelligent Krishna,
even as the Adityas, the Vasus, and the Rudras adore the wisdom of
Vrihaspati. O virtuous one, I will in thy presence, offer worship unto
that illustrious scion of Dasarha's race. Listen to me about that
worship. I will give him sixteen cars made of gold, each drawn by four
excellent and well-adorned steeds of uniform colour and of the Vahlika
breed. O Kaurava, I will give him eight elephants with temporal juice
always trickling down and tusks as large as poles of ploughs, capable of
smiting hostile ranks, and each having eight human attendants. I will
give him a century of handsome maid-servants of the complexion of gold,
all virgins, and man-servants I will give him as, many. I will give him
eighteen thousand woolen blankets soft to the touch, all presented to us
by the hill-men. I will also give him a thousand deer-skins brought from
China and other things of the kind that may be worthy of Kesava. I will
also give him this serene gem of the purest rays that shines day and
night, for Kesava alone deserves it. This car of mine drawn by mules that
makes a round of full fourteen Yojanas a day, I will also give him. I
will place before him every-day-provisions eight times greater than what
is necessary for the animals and attendants that form his train. Mounted
on their cars, having their person well-adorned, all my sons and
grandsons, save Duryodhana, will go out to receive him. And thousands of
graceful and well-decked dancing girls will go out on foot to receive the
illustrious Kesava. And the beautiful girls that will go out of the town
for receiving Janardana will go out unveiled. Let all the citizens with
their wives and children behold the illustrious slayer of Madhu wit h as
much respect and devotion as they show when casting their eyes on the
morning sun. Let the canopy all round, at my command, be crowded with
pendants and banners, and let the road, by which Kesava will come, be
well-watered and its dusts removed. Let Dussasana's abode, which is
better than Duryodhana's, be cleansed and well-adorned without delay.
That mansion consisting of many beautiful buildings, is pleasant and
delightful, and abounds with the wealth of all seasons. It is in that
abode that all my wealth, as also Duryodhana's, are deposited. Let all
that scion of the Vrishni race deserves be given unto him.'"
