SECTION XCIII
"The holy one said, 'That, indeed, which should be said by a person of
great wisdom: that, indeed, which should be said by one possessed of
great foresight; that indeed, which should be said by one like thee to a
friend like me; that indeed, which is deserving of thee, being consistent
with virtue and profit, and truth; that, O Vidura, hath been said by
thee, father and mother-like, unto me. That which thou hast told me is
certainly true, worthy of approbation and consistent with reason. Listen,
however, with attention, O Vidura, to the reason of my coming. Well
knowing the wickedness of Dhritarashtra's son and the hostility of the
Kshatriyas that have sided with him. I have still, O Vidura, come to the
Kurus. Great will be the merit earned by him who will liberate from the
meshes of death the whole earth, with her elephants, cars and steeds,
overwhelmed with a dreadful calamity. If a man striving to the best of
his abilities to perform a virtuous act meets with failure, I have not
the least doubt that the merit of that act becomes his, notwithstanding
such failure. This also is known to those that are conversant with
religion and scripture, that if a person having intended mentally to
commit a sinful act does not actually commit it, the demerit of that act
can never be his. I will sincerely endeavour, O Vidura, to bring about
peace between the Kurus and the Srinjayas who are about to be slaughtered
in battle. That terrible calamity (which hangs over them all) hath its
origin in the conduct of the Kurus, for it is directly due to the action
of Duryodhana and Karna, the other Kshatriyas only following the lead of
these two. The learned regard him to be a wretch who doth not by his
solicitation seek to save a friend who is about to sink in calamity.
Striving to the best of his might, even to the extent of seizing him by
the hair, one should seek to dissuade a friend from an improper act. In
that case, he that acteth so, instead of incurring blame, reapeth praise.
It behoveth Dhritarashtra's son, therefore, O Vidura, with his
counsellors, to accept my good and beneficial counsels that are
consistent with virtue and profit and competent to dispel the present
calamity. I will, therefore, sincerely endeavour to bring about the good
of Dhritarashtra's sons and of the Pandavas, as also of all the
Kshatriyas on the face of the earth. If while endeavouring to bring about
the good (of my friends), Duryodhana judgeth me wrongly, I shall have the
satisfaction of my own conscience, and a true friend is one who assumeth
the functions of an intercessor when dissensions break out between
kinsmen. In order, again, that unrighteous, foolish, and inimical persons
may not afterwards say that though competent, still Krishna did not make
any attempt to restrain the angry Kurus and the Pandavas from
slaughtering one another I have come here. Indeed, it is to serve both
parties that I have come hither. Having striven to bring about peace, I
will escape the censure of all the kings. If after listening to my
auspicious words, fraught with virtue and profit, the foolish Duryodhana
accept them not, he will only invite his fate. If without sacrificing the
interests of the Pandavas I can bring about peace among the Kurus, my
conduct will be regarded as highly meritorious, O high-souled one, and
the Kauravas themselves will be liberated from the meshes of death. If
the sons of Dhritarashtra reflect coolly on the words I shall
utter--words fraught with wisdom, consistent with righteousness, and
possessed of grave import,--then that peace which is my object will be
brought about and the Kauravas will also worship me (as the agent
thereof). If, on the other hand, they seek to injure me, I tell thee that
all the kings of the earth; united together, are no match for me, like a
herd of deer incapable of standing before an enraged lion.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said these words, that bull of the
Vrishni race and delighter of Yadavas, then laid himself down on his soft
bed for sleep.'"
