SECTION LXXXIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Rising up (from his bed) at day-dawn, Krishna went
through his morning rites, and taking leave of the Bharatas, set out for
the city (of the Kurus). Ana all the inhabitants of Vrikasthala, bidding
farewell unto that mighty one of long arms while he was about to depart,
all returned to their homes. And all the Dhartarashtras except
Duryodhana, attired in excellent robes, and with Bhishma, Drona, Kripa,
and others, went out to meet him. And the citizens by thousands, O king,
on cars of diverse kinds, and many on foot, also came out, desirous of
beholding Hrishikesa. And meeting on the way Bhishma of spotless deed,
and Drona, and Dhritarashtra's sons, he entered the city, surrounded by
them all. And in honour of Krishna, the city was beautifully adorned, and
the principal streets were decorated with diverse jewels and gems. And, O
king, O bull of the Bharata race, on that occasion no one,--man, woman,
or child,--remained in doors, so eager were the citizens for beholding
Vasudeva. And all the citizens came out and lined the streets and bent
their heads down to the ground singing eulogies in his honour, O king,
when Hrishikesa entered the city and passed through it. And substantial
mansions, filled with high-born ladies, seemed to be on the point of
falling down on the ground in consequence of their living weight. And
although Vasudeva's steeds were endued with great speed, yet they moved
very slowly through that dense mass of human beings. And that lotus-eyed
grinder of foes then entered Dhritarashtra's ash-coloured palace which
was enriched with numerous buildings. And having passed through the first
three chambers of the palace, that chastiser of foes, Kesava, came upon
the royal son of Vichitravirya. And upon that son of Dasarha's race
approaching his presence, the blind monarch of great fame stood up along
with Drona and Bhishma, Kripa and Somadatta, and king Vahlika also,--all
stood up for honouring Janardana. And the Vrishni hero, having approached
king Dhritarashtra of great fame, worshipped him and Bhishma with proper
words and without losing any time. And having offered that worship unto
them according to established usage, Madhava the slayer of Madhu, greeted
the other kings according to their seniority in years. And Janardana then
accosted the illustrious Drona and his son, and Vahlika, and Kripa, and
Somadatta. And there in that chamber Jay a spacious seat of beautiful
workmanship, made of gold and set with jewels. And at Dhritarashtra's
request, Achyuta took that seat; and the priests of Dhritarashtra duly
offered Janardana a cow, honey and curds and water. And after the rites
of hospitality were over, Govinda remained there for a while, surrounded
by the Kurus, laughing and jesting with them according to their
relationship with him. And that illustrious grinder of foes, honoured and
worshipped by Dhritarashtra, came out with the king's permission. And
Madhava having duly greeted all the Kurus in their assembly, then went to
the delightful abode of Vidura; and Vidura, having approached Janardana
of Dasarha's race thus arrived at his abode, worshipped him with every
auspicious and desirable offering. And he said, 'What use, O lotus-eyed
one, in telling thee of the joy I feel at this advent of thine, for thou
art the inner Soul of all embodied creatures.' And after the hospitable
reception was over, Vidura, conversant with all the principles of
morality, enquired of Govinda, the slayer of Madhu, about the welfare of
Pandavas. And that scion of Dasarha's race, that chief of the Vrishnis,
unto whom the past and the future were as the present, knowing that
Vidura was loved by the Pandavas and friendly towards them, and learned,
and firm in morality, and honest, and harbouring no wrath (against the
Pandavas), and wise, began to tell him everything in detail about the
doings of the sons of Pandu.'"
