SECTION XCVI
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words uttered by the high-souled
Kesava, all the persons who sat in that assembly remained silent, their
hair standing on their ends. And all the kings thought within themselves
that there was no man who could dare reply to that speech. And seeing
that all the kings sat silent, Jamadagni's son (addressing Duryodhana)
then said these words in that assembly of Kurus, 'Listen confidingly to
my words illustrated by an example, and seek thy own good if my speech
recommends itself to thee. There was a king of yore named Dambhodbhava,
who was the Head of the earth. It hath been heard by us that his
sovereignty extended over the whole world. And that mighty car-warrior,
rising every morning after the night had passed away, called the
Brahmanas and the Kshatriyas unto himself and asked them, saying, 'Be he
a Sudra, a Vaisya, a Kshatriya, or a Brahmana, is there any one who is
superior or even equal to me in battle?' And uttering these words that
king wandered over the earth, intoxicated with pride and thinking of
nothing else. And it so happened that certain Brahmanas endued with high
souls, conversant with the Vedas, and fearing nothing on earth,
counselled the monarch, repeatedly boasting of his prowess, to curb his
pride. But though forbidden by those Brahmanas to boast in that way, the
king continued to ask the Brahmanas as before the same question day after
day. And some high-souled Brahmanas then, endued with ascetic merit and
acquainted with the proofs furnished by the Vedas, were inflamed with
anger, and addressing that proud and boastful king intoxicated with
prosperity, told him, 'There are two persons who are foremost of all men
and who are always victorious in battle. Thou, O king, wilt by no means
be equal to them if thou seekest an encounter with any one of them.' And
thus addressed by them, the king asked those Brahmanas, saying, 'Where
may those two heroes be found? In what race are they born? What feats
have they achieved? And who are they? And the Brahmanas answered him,
saying, It had been heard by us that those two persons are ascetics
called Nara and Narayana. They have both taken their births in the race
of man. Go and fight with them, O king. It is that illustrious pair, Nara
and Narayana, who are now practising the severest of penances in some
hidden region of the mountains of Gandhamadana.' Hearing those words of
the Brahmanas, that king speedily mustered his large army consisting of
six kinds of forces,[7] and unable to bear their reputation, marched to
the spot where those unvanquished ascetics were, and arrived at the
rugged and frightful mountains of Gandhamadana. He began to search after
those Rishis, and at last, came upon them concealed within the woods. And
beholding those two best of persons emaciated with hunger and thirst,
their veins swollen and visible, and themselves much afflicted with cold
winds, and the hot rays of the sun, he approached them, and touching
their feet, enquired after their welfare. And the two Rishis received the
king hospitably, with fruits and roots, and a seat and water. And they
then enquired after the king's business, saying, 'Let it be done.' And
thus addressed by them, the king said unto them the same words that he
was in the habit of saying unto all. And he said, 'The whole earth has
been conquered by the might of my arms. All my foes have been slain.
Desiring a battle with you both I have come to this mountain. Offer me
this hospitality. I have been cherishing this wish from a long time.'
Thus addressed, Nara and Narayana said, 'O best of kings, wrath and
covetousness have no place in this retreat. How can a battle, therefore,
be possible here? There are no weapons here, and nothing of
unrighteousness and malice. Seek battle elsewhere. There are many
Kshatriyas on earth.'
"Rama continued, 'Although thus addressed, the king still pressed them
for giving him battle. The Rishis, however, continually soothed him and
overlooked his importunity. King Dambhodbhava, still desirous of battle,
repeatedly summoned those Rishis to fight. Nara, then, O Bharata, taking
up a handful of grass-blades, said, 'Desirous of battle as thou art,
come, O Kshatriya, and fight! Take up all thy arms, and array thy troops.
I will curb thy eagerness for battle hereafter!' Dambhodbhava then said,
If, O ascetic, thou thinkest this weapon of thine fit to be used against
us, I shall fight with thee though thou mayest use that weapon, for I
have come hither desirous of fighting.' Saying this, Dambhodbhava with
all his troops, desirous of slaying that ascetic, covered all sides with
a shower of arrows. That ascetic, however, by means of those blades of
grass, baffled all those terrible shafts of the king that were capable of
mangling the bodies of hostile warriors. The invincible Rishi then let
off towards the king his own terrible weapon made of grass-blades and
which was incapable of being counteracted. And highly wonderful was that
which happened, for that ascetic, incapable of missing his aim, pierced
and cut off, by those grass-blades alone, the eyes and ears and noses of
the hostile warriors, aided also by his power of illusion. And beholding
the entire welkin whitened by those grass-blades, the king fell at the
feet of the Rishi and said, 'Let me be blessed! Ever inclined to grant
protection unto those that sought it, Nara then, O king, said unto that
monarch, 'Be obedient to the Brahmanas and be virtuous. Never do so
again. O king, O tiger among monarchs, a conqueror of hostile towns, a
Kshatriya mindful of the duties of his own or, should never, within even
his heart, be as thou art. Filled with pride, never insult anybody on any
occasion, be inferior or superior to thee. Even such conduct would befit
thee. Acquiring wisdom, abandoning covetousness and pride, controlling
thy soul, restraining thy passions, practising forgiveness and humility,
and becoming amiable, O king, go, and cherish thy subjects. Without
ascertaining the strength and weakness of men, never insult any one under
any circumstances. Blessed be thou, and with our leave, go hence, and
never again behave in this way. At our command, enquire thou always of
the Brahmanas as to what is for thy good! The king then, worshipping the
feet of those two illustrious Rishis, returned to his city, and from that
time began to practise righteousness. Great indeed, was that feat
achieved of old by Nara. Narayana, again, became superior to Nara in
consequence of many more qualities. Therefore, O king, besides such
weapons as Kakudika, Suka, Naka, Akshisantarjana, Santana, Nartana,
Ghora, and Asyamodaka, are placed on the string of that best of bows
called Gandiva, go thou unto Dhananjaya, laying aside thy pride Struck
with these weapons, men always yield up their lives. Indeed, these
weapons have other means corresponding with the eight passions, such as
lust, wrath, covetousness, vanity, insolence, pride, malice, and
selfishness. Struck with them, men are confounded, and move about
frantically deprived of their senses. Under their influence, persons
always sleep heavily, cut capers, vomit, pass urine and excreta, weep,
and laugh incessantly. Indeed, that Arjuna is irresistible in fight, who
hath for his friend Narayana--the Creator and Lord of all the
worlds--fully acquainted with the course of everything. Who is there in
the three worlds, O Bharata, who would venture to vanquish that hero--the
Ape-bannered Jishnu--who hath no equal in battle? Countless are the
virtues that reside in Partha. Janardana again, is superior to him. Thou
art thyself well-acquainted with Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti. They that
were Nara and Narayana in days of yore are now Arjuna and Kesava. Know
then, O great king, who those brave and foremost of persons are. If thou
believest in this and dost not mistrust me adopt thou a virtuous
resolution and make peace with the sons of Pandu. If thou regardest this
as thy good, viz., that there should be no disunion in thy family, then
make peace, O foremost of Bharata's race, and do not set thy heart upon
battle. O thou, that are foremost of Kuru's line, the race to which thou
belongest is highly regarded on earth. Let that regard continue to be
paid to it. Blessed be thou, think of what conduces to thy own welfare.'"
