SECTION XCII
"Vaisampayana said, 'After Kesava had dined and been refreshed, Vidura
said unto him during the night, 'O Kesava, this advent of thine hath not
been a well judged one, for, O Janardana, Dhritarashtra's son
transgresseth the rules of both profit and religion, is wicked and
wrathful, insulteth others, though himself desirous of honours, and
disobeyeth the commands of the aged. He is, O Madhava, a transgressor of
the scriptures, ignorant, and of wicked soul, already overtaken by fate,
untractable, and disposed to do evil to those that seek his good. His
soul is possessed by desire and lust. He foolishly regardeth himself as
very wise. He is the enemy of all his true friends. Ever-suspicious,
without any control over his soul, and ungrateful, he hath abandoned all
virtue and is in love with sin. He is foolish, with understanding
uncultivated, a slave of his senses, ever obedient to the impulses of
lust and avarice, and irresolute in every act that should be done. He is
endued with these and many other vices. Although thou wilt point out to
him what is for his good, he will yet disregard it all, moved by pride
and anger. He hath great faith in Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, and
Karna, and Drona's son, and Jayadratha, and, therefore, he never setteth
his heart on peace, O Janardana. Dhritarashtra's sons, with Karna, firmly
believe that the Pandavas are incapable of even looking at Bhishma,
Drona, and other heroes, not to speak of fighting against them. The
foolish Duryodhana of limited sight, having assembled a huge army
regardeth, O slayer of Madhu, that his purposes are already achieved. The
foolish son of Dhritarashtra hath arrived at the conclusion that Karna,
single-handed, is competent to vanquish his foes. He will, therefore,
never make peace. Thou, O Kesava, desirest to establish peace and
brotherly feelings between the two parties. But know that all the sons of
Dhritarashtra have come to the conclusion that they would not give unto
the Pandavas what, indeed, the latter have a right to. With those that
are so resolved thy words will certainly prove vain. Where, O slayer of
Madhu, words, good or bad, are of the same effect, no wise man would
spend his breath for nothing, like a singer before the deaf. As a
Brahmana before a conclave of Chandalas, thy words, O Madhava, would
command no respect among those ignorant and wicked wretches that have no
reverence for all that deserveth reverence. Foolish, as long as he hath
strength, he will never obey thy counsels. Whatever words thou mayest
speak to him will be perfectly futile. It doth not seem proper to me, O
Krishna, that thou shouldst go into the midst of these wicked-minded
wretches seated together. It doth not seem proper to me, O Krishna, that
going thither thou shouldst utter words against those wicked-souled,
foolish, unrighteous wights, strong in number. In consequence of their
having never worshipped the aged, in consequence of their having been
blinded by prosperity and pride, and owing to the pride of youth and
wrath, they will never accept the good advice thou mayest place before
them. He hath mustered a strong force, O Madhava, and he hath his
suspicions of thyself. He will, therefore, never obey any counsel that
thou mayest offer. The sons of Dhritarashtra, O Janardana, are inspired
with the firm belief that at present Indra himself, at the head of all
the celestials, is incapable of defeating them in battle. Efficacious as
thy words always are, they will prove to be of no efficacy with persons
impressed with such a conviction and who always follow the impulses of
lust and wrath. Staying in the midst of his ranks of elephants and his
army consisting of cars and heroic infantry, the foolish and wicked
Duryodhana, with all fears dispelled, regardeth the whole earth to have
already been subjugated by him. Indeed, Dhritarashtra's son coveteth
extensive empire on the earth without any rivals. Peace, therefore, with
him is unattainable. That which he hath in his possession he regardeth as
unalterably his. Alas, the destruction on the earth seems to be at hand
for the sake of Duryodhana, for, impelled by fate, the kings of the
earth, with all the Kshatriya warriors, have assembled together, desirous
of battling with the Pandavas? All those kings, O Krishna, are in enmity
with thee and have all been deprived of their possessions before this by
thee. Through fear of thee those heroic monarchs have joined together
with Karna and made an alliance with Dhritarashtra's sons. Reckless of
their very lives, all those warriors have united with Duryodhana and are
filled with delight at the prospect of fighting the Pandavas. O hero of
Dasarha's race, it doth not commend itself to me that thou shouldst enter
into their midst. How, O grinder of foes, wilt thou repair into the midst
of those numerous enemies of thine, of wicked souls, and seated together?
O thou of mighty arms, thou art, indeed, incapable of being vanquished by
the very gods, and I know, O slayer of foes, thy manliness and
intelligence. O Madhava, the love I bear to thee is equal to that I bear
to the sons of Pandu. I say, therefore, these words to thee from my
affection, regard, and friendship for thee. What need is there in
expressing to thee the delight that has been mine at sight of thy
persons, for, thou, O thou of eyes like lotus, art the inner Soul of all
embodied creatures.'"
