SECTION XCIV
"Vaisampayana said, 'In such conversation between those two distinguished
persons, both of whom were endued with great intelligence, that night,
lit with bright stars, passed away. Indeed, the night passed away against
the wishes of the illustrious Vidura, who had been listening to the
varied conversation of Krishna fraught with virtue, profit, and desire,
and made up of delightful words and syllables of agreeable import; and
also those of Krishna himself, of 'immeasurable prowess, listening to
discourses equal in style and character. Then, at early dawn a band of
choristers and bards gifted with melodious voices, awoke Kesava with
sweet sounds of conchs and cymbals. And rising from bed, Janardana of
Dasarha's race, that bull amongst all the Sattwatas, went through all the
customary acts of the morning. And having cleansed himself by a bath,
recited the sacred Mantras and poured libations of clarified butter on
the sacrificial fire. Madhava decked his person and began to worship the
rising sun. And while the unvanquished Krishna of Dasarha's race was
still engaged in his morning devotions, Duryodhana and Suvala's son
Sakuni came to him and said, 'Dhritarashtra is seated in his court, with
all the Kurus headed by Bhishma and with all the kings of the earth. They
are all soliciting thy presence, O Govinda, like the celestials in heaven
desiring the presence of Sakra himself,--thus addressed, Govinda greeted
them both with sweet and courteous enquiries. And when the sun had risen
a little higher, Janardana, that chastiser of foes, summoning a number of
Brahmanas, made them presents of gold and robes and kine and steeds.
And after he had thus given away much wealth and taken his seat, his
driver (Daruka) came and saluted that unvanquished hero of Dasarha's
race. And Daruka soon returned with his master's large and blazing car
furnished with rows of tinkling bells and harnessed with excellent
steeds. And understanding that his handsome car adorned with every
ornament and producing a rattle, deep as the rumbling of the mighty
masses of clouds, was ready, the high-souled Janardana, that delighter of
all the Yadavas, walking round the sacred fire and a band of Brahmanas,
and putting on the gem known by the name of Kaustubha, and blazing with
beauty, surrounded by the Kurus, and well-protected by the Vrishnis,
mounted on it. And Vidura, conversant with all the precepts of religion,
followed on his own car that scion of Dasarha's race, that foremost of
all living creatures, that first of all persons gifted with intelligence.
And Duryodhana and Suvala's son Sakuni also, on one car followed Krishna,
that chastiser of foes. And Satyaki and Kritavarman and the other mighty
car-warriors of the Vrishni race, all rode behind Krishna on cars and
steeds and elephants. And, O king, the handsome cars of those heroes,
adorned with gold and drawn by excellent steeds and each producing a loud
rattle, as they moved forward, shone brilliantly. And Kesava, endued with
great intelligence, and beaming with beauty, soon came upon a broad
street that had previously been swept and watered, and that was fit to be
used by the highest of kings. And when that scion of Dasarha's race set
out, cymbals began to play, and conchs began to be blown, and other
instruments also to pour forth their music. And great number of youthful
heroes, foremost in the world for heroism, and possessed of lion-like
prowess, proceeded, surrounding Sauri's car. And many thousands of
soldiers, attired in a variegated dresses, bearing swords and lances and
axes, marched in advance of Kesava. And there were full five hundred
elephants, and cars by thousands, that followed that unvanquished hero of
Dasarha's race while he proceeded. And, O chastiser of foes, all the
citizens of the capital, of all ages and both sexes, desirous of
beholding Janardana came out into the streets. And the terraces and
balconies of the houses were so thronged by ladies that the houses were
on the point of falling down with the weight. And worshipped by the
Kurus, and listening to various sweet speeches, and returning the
greetings of all as each deserved, Kesava went along the street, casting
his eyes on all. And at last, when Kesava reached the Kuru court, his
attendants loudly blew their conchs and trumpets and filled the welkin
with that blare. And, thereupon, that whole assembly of kings, of
immeasurable prowess, trembled with delight at the expectation of soon
setting their eyes on Krishna. And hearing the rattle of his car, that
rumbled like the deep roll of rain-charged clouds, the monarchs
understood Krishna to be near, and the hair of their bodies stood erect
with delight. And having reached the gate of the court, Sauri, that bull
among the Satwatas, alighting from his car, that resembled the summit of
Kailasa, entered the court which looked like a mass of newly-risen
clouds, and blazed forth with beauty, and resembled the very abode of the
great Indra. And that illustrious hero entered the court, arm-in-arm with
Vidura and Satyaki on either side, and overshadowing with his own the
splendour of all the Kurus, like the sun overshadowing the radiance of
lesser lights in the firmament. And before Vasudeva sat Karna and
Duryodhana, while behind him were seated the Vrishnis with Kritavarman.
And Bhishma and Drona, and others with Dhritarashtra were on the point of
rising up from their seats for honouring Janardana. Indeed, as soon as
he, of Dasarha's race, came, the illustrious blind monarch, Drona and
Bhishma, all rose up from their seats. And when that mighty ruler of men,
king Dhritarashtra, rose up from his seat, those kings by thousands
around him all rose up also. And at Dhritarashtra's command, a seat
beautiful all over, and adorned with gold, had been kept there for
Krishna, And after taking his seat, Madhava smilingly greeted the king,
and Bhishma, and Drona, and all other rulers, each according to his age.
And all the kings of the earth, and all the Kurus also, beholding Kesava
arrived in that assembly, worshipped him duly. And as that chastiser of
foes, that vanquisher of hostile cities, that hero of Dasarha's race, was
seated there, he beheld the Rishis whom he had seen while proceeding to
Hastinapur, staying in the firmament. And beholding those Rishis with
Narada at their head, he of Dasarha's race, slowly addressed Bhishma the
son of Santanu, saying, 'O king, the Rishis have come to see this earthly
conclave of ours. Invite them with offer of seats and abundant courtesy,
for if they are not seated, no one here is capable of taking his seat.
Let proper worship, therefore, be speedily offered unto these Rishis with
souls under proper control. And beholding the Rishis then at the gate of
the palace, Santanu's son quickly ordered the servants to bring seats for
them. And soon enough they brought large and beautiful seats embroidered
with gold and set with gems. And after the Rishis. O Bharata, had taken
their seats and accepted the Arghyas offered to them, Krishna took his
seat, so also all the kings. And Dussasana gave an excellent seat to
Satyaki, while Vivingsati gave another golden one to Kritavarman. And not
far from where Krishna sat, that illustrious and wrathful pair, Karna and
Duryodhana, sat together on the same seat. And Sakuni, the king of
Gandhara, surrounded by the chiefs of his country, sat there, O king,
with his son beside him. And the high-souled Vidura sat on a begemmed
seat covered with a white deer-skin that almost touched Krishna's seat.
And all the kings in the assembly, although they gazed at Janardana of
Dasarha's race for a long while, were not, however, gratified with their
gaze, like drinkers of the Amrita, that are never satiated with quaffing
measure after measure. And Janardana attired in yellow robes having the
complexion of the Atasi flower, sat in the midst of that assembly like a
sapphire mounted on gold. And after Govinda had taken his seat, a perfect
silence ensued, for none present there spoke a single word.'"
