SECTION XCVIII
"Kanwa said, 'When Matali was wending his way, he saw the great Rishi
Narada proceeding at his pleasure to pay a visit to Varuna (the god of
the waters). And beholding Matali, Narada asked him, saying, 'Whither
dost thou go? Is it, O charioteer, on any mission of thy own, or is it at
Satakratu's command, that this journey of thine is undertaken?' Thus
addressed on the way by Narada who was proceeding towards his
destination, Matali duly informed Narada, of his mission. And the Rishi,
informed of everything, then said unto Matali, 'We shall go together. As
regards myself, it is to see the Lord of the waters that I am proceeding,
having left the heavens, searching the nether regions, I shall tell you
everything. After a good search there, we shall select a bridegroom, O
Matali! And penetrating then into nether regions, that illustrious
couple, Matali and Narada, beheld that Regent of the world--the Lord of
the waters. And there Narada received worship due to a celestial Rishi,
and Matali received that equal to what is offered to the great Indra. And
both of them skilful in business, informed Varuna of their purpose, and
obtaining his leave they began to wander in that region of the Nagas. And
Narada who knew all the residents of the nether regions then began to
describe in detail unto his companion all about the dwellers of the Naga
"And Narada said, 'Thou hast, O charioteer, seen Varuna surrounded by his
sons and grandsons. Behold the dominions of the Lord of the waters. It is
delightful all round, and full of riches. The son, endued with great
wisdom, of Varuna, the Lord of the Ocean, is even much distinguished for
his conduct and disposition and for his holiness. Possessed of eyes like
lotus leaves, this Pushkara is, indeed, Varuna's much-loved son, endued
with great beauty and delightful to behold. He has been chosen by Soma's
daughter as her husband. That daughter of Soma, equal in beauty unto a
second Sree, is known by the name of Jyotsnakali. Indeed, it is said,
that she had once before chosen the eldest and foremost of Aditi's son as
her lord. Behold now, O companion of the Lord of the celestials, that
abode, made entirely of gold, and full of the wine called Varuni. Indeed,
having obtained that wine, the gods acquired their god-heads. These
blazing weapons also of every kind that thou seest, belonged, O Matali,
to the Daityas who have been deprived of their sovereignty. These weapons
are incapable of deterioration, and when hurled at the foe always return
into the hand that hurleth them. Obtained by the gods as the booty of
war, they require considerable mental energy to be used against foes.
Here dwelt in days of yore many tribes of Rakshasas and Daityas,
possessed of many kinds of celestial weapons, but they were all
vanquished by the gods. Behold, there, in Varuna's lake is that fire of
blazing flames, and that discus of Vishnu surrounded by the lustrous
splendour of mighty caloric. Behold, there lieth that knotty bow that was
created for the destruction of the world. It is always protected with
great vigilance by the gods, and it is from this bow that the one wielded
by Arjuna hath taken its name. Endued with the strength of hundred
thousand bows, the power it assumes at the hour of battle is
indescribably great. It punishes all punishable wicked kings endued with
the nature of Rakshasas. This fierce weapon was first created by Brahman,
the utterer of the Vedas. The great preceptor Sukra hath said that this
weapon is a terrible one in respect of all kings. Endued with great
energy, it is held by the sons of the Lord of waters. Behold, there in
the umbrella-room is the umbrella of the Lord of the waters. It droppeth
refreshing showers like the clouds. The water dropped from this umbrella,
though pure as the moon, is yet enveloped by such darkness that it cannot
be seen by anybody. There, in these regions, O Matali, innumerable are
the wonders to be seen. Your business, however, will suffer if we spend
more time here. We will, therefore, leave this region soon.'"
