SECTION CIII
"Narada said, 'This foremost of cities that thou beholdest and which
resembles the Amaravati of the chief of the celestials himself, is known
by the name of Bhogavati. It is ruled over by Vasuki, the king of the
Nagas. That Shesha dwelleth here, who, in consequence of his ascetic
austerities of the foremost order, is able to support this earth with all
her vastness. His body is like that of a white mountain. He is decked in
celestial ornaments. He hath a thousand heads. His tongues are blazing
like flames of fire, and he is endued with great strength. There dwell in
happiness innumerable Nagas--sons of Surasa--possessed of diverse forms,
and decked on ornaments of diverse kinds, bearing the signs of gems,
Swastika, circles and drinking vessels. All of them endued with great
strength are by nature fierce. Some have a thousand heads, some five
hundred, and some three. And some have two heads, and some five, and some
have seven faces. And all of them are possessed of huge bodies that
resemble the mountains stretching over the earth. Millions and tens of
millions are they, in fact, uncountable, even as regards those of' them
that belong to a single race. Listen, however, to me as I name a few of
the more famous ones amongst them. They are Vasuki, Takshaka, Karkotaka,
Dhanjaya, Kaliya, Nahusha, Aswatara, Vakyakunda, Mani, Apurana, Khaga,
Vamana, Elapatra, Kukura, Kukuna, Aryaka, Nandaka, Kalasa, Potaka,
Kalilasaka, Pinjaraka, Airavata, Sumanmukha, Dadhimukha, Sankha, Nanda,
Upanandaka, Apta, Kotaraka, Sikhi, Nishthuraka, Tittiri, Hastibhadra,
Kumuda, Maylapindaka, the two Padmas, Pundarika, Pushpa, Mudgaraparnaka,
Karavira, Pitharaka, Samvritta, Vritta, Pindara, Vilwapatra, Mushikada,
Sirishaka, Dilipa, Sankha-sirsha, Jyotishka, Aparajita, Kauravya,
Dhritarashtra, Kuhara, Krisaka, Virajas, Dharana, Savahu, Mukhara, Jaya,
Vidhira, Andha, Visundi, Virasa, and Sarasa. These and many others there
are amongst the sons of Kasyapa. See O Matali, if there is anybody here
whom thou canst elect.'
"Kanwa continued, 'Matali, meanwhile, had been looking attentively at a
person that stood by. And after Narada had ceased speaking, the celestial
charioteer with gratified mind asked the Rishi, saying, 'Of what race is
he the delighter--that comely youth of great radiance--who standeth
before Aryaka of Kauravya's line? Who is his father, and who is his
mother? Of what Naga's race is he? Indeed, of what line doth he stand as
a high flag-staff? In consequence of his intelligence, his patience, his
beauty, and his youth, my heart, O celestial Rishi, hath been attracted
towards him. That youth will make the best of husbands for my Gunakesi.'
"Kanwa continued, 'Beholding Matali's gratification at seeing the Naga
called Sumukha, Narada informed him of the nobility of his parentage and
of his feats. And he said, 'Born in the race of Airavata this prince of
Nagas is named Sumukha. He is the favourite grandson of Aryaka, and the
daughter's son of Vamana. The father of this youth was, O Matali, the
Naga called Chikura. Not long before was he slain by Vinata's Son.'
Hearing this Matali became highly pleased, and addressing Narada, the
charioteer said, 'This best of Nagas is, O sire, very acceptable to me
for a son-in-law. Make an endeavour to secure him, for I am highly
pleased at the thought of bestowing on this Naga, O Muni, my dear
daughter.'"
