SECTION CII
"Narada said, 'The region where we now are is called Rasatala and is the
seventh stratum below the Earth. Here dwelleth Surabhi, the mother of all
kine, she, who was born of the Amrita. She always yieldeth milk which is
the essence of all the best things of the earth, and which, excellent as
it is, and of one taste, springeth from the essence of the six different
kinds of tastes (that are talked of). The faultless Surabhi herself
sprang in days of old from the mouth of the Grandsire, gratified with
drinking the Amrita and vomiting the best things. A single jet only of
her milk, falling on the earth, created what is known as the sacred and
the excellent "Milky Ocean." The verge of that ocean all round is always
covered with white foam resembling a belt of flowers. Those best of
ascetics that are known by the name of the Foam-drinkers dwell around
this ocean, subsisting on that foam only. They are called Foam-drinkers
because they live, O Matali, on nothing else save that foam. Engaged in
the practice of the severest of austerities, the very gods are known to
fear them. From her are born four other kine, O Matali, supporting the
four quarters and therefore, are they called the supporters of the
quarters (Dikpali). Born of Surabhi herself, she who supporteth the
eastern quarter is called Surupa. She, who supporteth the southern
quarter is called Hansika. That illustrious cow, O Matali, of universal
form, who supporteth the western quarter ruled by Varuna is known by the
name of Subhadra. The northern quarter comprising the region of virtue,
and called after Kuvera the Lord of treasures, is supported by the cow
named Sarva-kamadugha. The gods, uniting with the Asuras, and making the
Mandara mountain their pole, churned the waters of the ocean and obtained
the wine called Varuni, and (the Goddess of Prosperity and Grace called)
Lakshmi, and Amrita, and that prince of steeds called Uchchhaisrava, and
that best of gems called Kaustubha. Those waters, O Matali, that yielded
these precious things had all been mixed with the milk of these tour
cows. As regards Surabhi, the milk she yielded becometh Swaha unto those
that live on Swaha, Swadha unto those that live on Swadha, and Amrita
unto those that live on Amrita. The couplet that was sung by the dwellers
of Rasatala in day of old, is still heard to be recited in the world by
the persons of learning. That couplet is this,--Neither in the region of
the Nagas, nor in Swarga, nor in Vimana, nor in Tripishtapa is residence
so happy as in Rasatala!'"
