SECTION C
"Narada continued, 'Here is that spacious and celebrated city of cities,
called Hiranyapura, belonging to the Daityas and Danavas, possessing a
hundred diverse kinds of illusion. Here in these regions called Patala,
it hath been built with great care by the divine artificer, and planned
by the Danava Maya. Endued with great energy and heroism, many Danavas,
having obtained boons (from Brahman) in days of old, lived here,
exhibiting a thousand different kinds of illusion. They were incapable of
being vanquished by Sakra or any other celestial, that is, by either
Yama, or Varuna, or the Lord of treasures (Kuvera). Here dwell, O Matali,
those Asuras called Kalakhanjas who sprang from Vishnu, and those
Rakshasas also called Yatudhanas who sprang from the feet of Brahman. All
of them are endued with frightful teeth, terrible impetus, the speed and
prowess of the wind, and great energy depending on powers of illusion.
Besides these, another class of Danavas called Nivatakavachas, who are
invincible in battle, have their abode here. Thou knowest bow Sakra is
unable to vanquish them. Many times, O Matali, thou, with thy son
Gomukha, and the chief of the celestials and lord of Sachi, along with
his son, had to retreat before them. Behold their homes, O Matali, that
are all made of silver and gold, and well-adorned with decorations done
according to the rules of art. All those mansions are decked with lapis
lazuli and corals, and made effulgent with the lustre of the
Arkasphatika, and the radiance of gem called Vajrasara. And many of those
palatial residences seem, as if, they have been made of the shine of
these gems called Padmaragas, or of bright marble, or of excellent wood.
And they are also possessed of the radiance of the sun, or blazing fire.
And all the edifices, adorned with gems and jewels, are very high and
stand close to another. Of spacious proportions and great architectural
beauty, it is impossible to say of what material these mansions are built
or to describe their style of beauty. Indeed, they are exceedingly
beautiful in consequence of their decorations. Behold these retreats of
the Daityas for recreation and sport, these beds of theirs for sleep,
these costly utensils of theirs set with precious stones, and these seats
also for their use. Behold these hills of theirs, looking like clouds,
those fountains of water, these trees also that move of their own will
and that yield all fruits and flowers that one may ask. See, O Matali, if
any bridegroom may be had here, acceptable to thee. If no one can be
found, we shalt, if thou likest, go hence to some other part of the
world.' Thus addressed, Matali answered Narada, saying, 'O celestial
Rishi, it behoveth me not to do anything that may be disagreeable to
dwellers of heaven. The gods and the Danavas, though brothers, are ever
at hostility with each other. How can I, therefore, make an alliance with
those that are our enemies? Let us repair, therefore, to some other
place. It behoveth me not to search among the Danavas. As regards
thyself, I know thy heart is ever set on fomenting quarrels.'"
