SECTION XCVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Having listened to the words of Jamadagnya, the
illustrious Rishi Kanwa also said these words unto Duryodhana in that
assembly of the Kurus.'
"Kanwa said, 'Brahman, the Grandsire of the universe, is indestructible
and eternal. Those illustrious Rishis, Nara and Narayana, are of the same
character. Of all the sons of Aditi, Vishnu alone is eternal. He alone is
unconquerable and indestructible, existing for ever, the Lord of all, and
the possessor of divine attributes. All others, such as the sun and the
moon, earth and water, wind, fire and firmament, planets, and stars, are
liable to destruction. All these, when the end of the universe cometh,
take leave of the three worlds. They are destroyed and created again and
again. Others also, such as men and animals and birds, and creatures
belonging to other orders of living existence,--indeed, all that move on
this world of men,--are endued with short lives. And as regards kings,
all of them, having enjoyed great prosperity, reach, at last, the hour of
destruction and are reborn in order to enjoy the fruits of good and evil
deeds. It behoveth thee then to make peace with Yudhishthira. Let the
Pandavas and the Kauravas both rule this earth. O Suyodhana, one should
not think in this way, viz., I am strong!--for O bull among men, it is
seen that there are persons stronger than those generally regarded
strong. O son of Kuru's race, physical strength is scarcely regarded as
strength by those that are really strong. As regards the Pandavas, endued
as they all are with prowess equal to that of the celestials, they are
also regarded as strong. In this connection is cited an old story, as an
example, the story, viz., of Matali searching for a bridegroom upon whom
to bestow his daughter. The king of the three worlds (Indra) had a
charioteer, named Matali, whom he dearly loved. Unto him was born a
daughter celebrated over the world for beauty. Endued with the celestial
beauty, that daughter of Matali was known by the name of Gunakesi. And,
indeed, in both loveliness and symmetry of bodily figure, she far
excelled other members of her sex. Knowing that the time for giving her
way had come, Matali with his wife became very anxious, thinking, O
monarch, of what he was to do next. And he thought within himself, 'Alas,
the birth of a daughter in the families of those that are well-behaved
and high-born and possess reputation and humility of character, is always
attended with evil results. Daughters, when born in respectable families,
always endanger the honour of three families, viz., their maternal and
paternal families and the family into which they are adopted by marriage.
Glancing in my mind's eye the worlds of gods and men, I have searched
both, but no eligible bridegroom have I found.'
"Kanwa continued, 'And it so happened that amongst the gods, the Daityas
and Gandharvas, men and numerous Rishis, none was regarded by Matali as
an eligible husband for his daughter. And having held a consultation then
in the night with his wife Sudharma, Matali set his heart upon making a
journey to the world of the Nagas. And he thought within himself,
'Amongst both gods and men I have not found a husband fit, in respect of
beauty, for my Gunakesi. Surely, one may be found amongst the Nagas.' And
saying this, he took his wife's leave and sniffing the head of his
daughter, Matali entered the nether regions.'"
