SECTION CXIV
"Narada said, 'Garuda then, that foremost of winged beings, addressed the
cheerless Galava and said, 'Because it is created by Agni, in the bowels
of the earth and augmented by Vayu, and because also the earth itself is
said to be Hiranmaya, therefore, is wealth called Hiranya. And because
wealth supports the world and sustains life, therefore, is it called
Dhana. It is for serving these ends that Dhana (wealth) exists from the
beginning in the three worlds. On that Friday, when either of the two
constellations--the Purvabhadra or the Uttarabhadra--is ascendant, Agni,
creating wealth by a fiat of his will, bestoweth it on mankind for the
increase of Kuvera's stock. The wealth that is embowelled in the Earth is
guarded by the deities called the Ajaikapats and the Ahivradnas, and also
by Kuvera. Exceedingly difficult of attainment, that wealth, therefore, O
bull among Brahmanas, is rarely attained. Without wealth there is no
chance of thy acquisition of the promised steeds. Beg thou, therefore, of
some king born in the race of some royal sage, who may, without
oppressing his subjects, crown our suit with success. There is a king
born in the lunar race, that is my friend. We shall go to him, for he,
amongst all on Earth, hath great wealth. That royal sage is known by the
name of Yayati, and he is the son of Nahusha. His prowess is incapable of
being baffled. Solicited by thee in person, and urged by me, he will give
what we seek, for he hath immense wealth, equal unto what belongeth to
Kuvera, the lord of treasures. Even thus, by accepting a gift, O learned
one, pay off thy debt to thy preceptor.' Talking thus, and thinking upon
what was best to be done, Garuda and Galava together went to king Yayati,
who was then in his capital called Pratisthana. The king received them
hospitably and gave them excellent Arghya and water to wash their feet.
And the king then asked them the cause of their advent. And thereupon
Garuda answered, saying, 'O son of Nahusha, this ocean of asceticism,
called Galava, is my friend. He had been, O monarch, a disciple of
Viswamitra for many thousand years. This holy Brahmana, when commanded by
Viswamitra to go away whithersoever he chose, addressed his preceptor at
that time, saying,--I desire to give something as preceptor's fee.
Knowing this one's resources to be poor, Viswamitra did not ask for
anything. But when he was repeatedly addressed by this Brahmana on the
subject of the tutorial fee, the preceptor, under a slight accession of
wrath, said, 'Give me eight hundred white steeds of good pedigree and of
lunar radiance, and each having one ear black in hue. If, O Galava, thou
desirest to give anything to thy preceptor, let this then be given!' It
was thus that Viswamitra endued with wealth of asceticism said unto him
in anger. And this bull among Brahmanas is on that account smarting with
great grief. Unable to fulfil that command (of his preceptor), he hath
now come to take thy shelter. O tiger among men, accepting this as alms
from thee, and filled once more with cheerfulness, he will, after paying
his preceptor's debt, devote himself again to serve ascetic penances. A
royal Rishi as thou art, and, therefore, endued with wealth of asceticism
of thy own, this Brahmana, by giving thee a portion of his wealth of
asceticism, will make thee richer in wealth of that kind. As many hairs,
O lord of men, as there are on a horse's body, so many regions of bliss,
O ruler of Earth, are attained by him that giveth away a horse in gift.
This one is as fit to accept a gift as thou art to make a gift. Let
therefore, thy gift in this instance be like milk deposited in a
conch-shell.'"
