SECTION CX
"Garuda said, 'This quarter is the favourite one of king Varuna, the
ruler of the ocean. Indeed, the lord of the waters had his origin here,
and it is hither that sovereignty lieth. And since it is here that
towards the day's end (paschat) the sun dismisseth his rays that this
quarter, O best of the twice-born ones, is called the west (paschima).
For ruling over all aquatic creatures and for the protection of the water
themselves, illustrious and divine Kasyapa installed Varuna here (as the
king of this region). Quaffing all the six juices of Varuna, the moon,
the dispeller of darkness, becometh young again in the beginning of the
fortnight. It was in the quarter, O Brahmana, that the Daityas were
routed and bound fast by the wind-god. And afflicted by a mighty tempest,
and breathing hard (as they fled), they at last laid themselves down in
this region to sleep (the sleep that knows no waking). Hither is that
mountain called Asta which is the cause of the evening twilight, and
which (daily) receiveth the sun lovingly turning towards it. It is from
this quarter that both Night and Sleep, issuing out at the close of day,
spread themselves, as if, for robbing all living creatures of half their
allotted periods of life. It was here that Sakra, beholding (his
stepmother) the goddess Diti lying asleep in a state of pregnancy, cut
off the foetus (into forty-nine parts), whence sprang the (forty-nine)
Maruts. It is towards this direction that the roots of Himavat stretch
towards the eternal Mandara (sunk in the ocean). By journeying for even a
thousand years one cannot attain to the end of those roots. It is in this
region that Surabhi (the mother of cows), repairing to the shores of the
extensive lake, adorned with golden lotuses, poureth forth her milk. Here
in the midst of the ocean is seen the headless trunk of the illustrious
Swarbhanu (Rahu) who is always bent upon devouring both sun and the moon.
Here is heard the loud chanting of the Vedas by Suvarnasiras, who is
invincible and of immeasurable energy, and whose hair is eternally green.
It is in this region that the daughter of Muni Harimedhas remained
transfixed in the welkin in consequence of Surya's injunction couched in
the words--Stop, Stop. Here, O Galava, wind, and fire, and earth, and
water, are all free, both day and night, from their painful sensations.
It is from this region that the sun's course begins to deviate from the
straight path, and it is in this direction that all the luminous bodies
(the constellations) enter the solar sphere. And having moved for
twenty-eight nights with the sun, they come out of the sun's course to
move in accompaniment with the moon. It is in this region that the rivers
which always feed the ocean have their sources. Here, in the abode of
Varuna, are the waters of the three worlds. In this region is situate the
abode of Anarta, the prince of snakes. And here is the unrivalled abode
also of Vishnu, who is without beginning and without end. In this region
is also situate the abode of the great Rishi Kasyapa, the son of Maricha.
The western quarter is thus narrated to thee in course of telling thee of
the different points. Tell me now, O Galava, towards which side, O best
of regenerate persons, shall we go?'"
