SECTION CVII
"Narada said, 'Thus addressed by Viswamitra of great intelligence Galava
was filled with such anxiety that he could not sit or lie down, or take
his food. A prey to anxiety and regret, lamenting bitterly, and burning
with remorse, Galava grew pale, and was reduced to a skeleton. And
smitten with sorrow, O Suyodhana, he indulged in these lamentations,
'Where shall I find affluent friends? Where shall I find money? Have I
any savings? Where shall I find eight hundred steeds of lunar whiteness?
What pleasure can I have in eating? What happiness can be mine in objects
of enjoyment? The very love of life is extinct in me. What need have I of
life? Repairing to the other shore of the great ocean, or to the furthest
verge of the earth, I will relinquish my life. Of what use can life be to
me? What happiness, without severe exertion, can be his who is poor,
unsuccessful, deprived of all the good things of life, and burthened with
debt? Death is preferable to life as regards him who having enjoyed the
wealth of friends through their friendship for himself, is unable to
return their favour. The religious acts of that man lose their efficacy
who having promised to do an act fails to perform it and is thus stained
with falsehood. One that is stained by falsehood cannot have beauty, or
children, or power, or influence. How, therefore, can such a one attain
to a blissful state? What ungrateful man hath ever earned fame? Where,
indeed, is his place, and where his happiness? An ungrateful person can
never win esteem and affection. Salvation also can never be his. He that
is destitute of wealth is a wretch that can scarcely be said to live.
Such a wretch cannot support his kinsmen and friends. Unable to make any
return for the benefits he receiveth, he certainly meeteth with
destruction. Even I am that wretch, ungrateful, destitute of resources,
and stained with falsehood, for having obtained my objects from my
preceptor, I am unable to do his bidding. Having first endeavoured to the
utmost, I will lay down my life. Before this, I never craved for any
thing from the very gods. The deities regard me for this in sacrificial
place. I will go and seek the protection of Vishnu, the divine Lord of
the three worlds, of Krishna the great refuge of all who are blessed with
protection. Bowing down unto him, I desire to see that highest of all
ascetics, the Eternal Krishna from whom flow all those possessions and
enjoyments that are owned by both gods and Asuras.' And while Galava was
thus lamenting, his friend Garuda, the son of Vinata, appeared in his
sight. And Garuda, from desire of doing him good, cheerfully addressed
him, saying, Thou art a dear friend, of mine. It is the duty of a friend,
when himself in prosperity, to look to the accomplishment of the wishes
of his friends. The prosperity that I have, O Brahmana, is constituted by
Vasava's younger brother Vishnu. Before this, I spoke to him on thy
behalf and he hath been pleased to grant my wishes. Come now, we will go
together. I will bear thee comfortably to the other shore of the ocean,
or to the furthest extremity of the earth. Come, O Galava, do not tarry.'"
