SECTION CXVIII
"Narada said, 'The illustrious Madhavi, faithful to her promise,
abandoning that prosperity and once more becoming a maiden, followed the
footsteps of the Brahmana Galava. And Galava, whose heart was set upon
the accomplishment of his own business, reflecting upon what he should do
next then went to the city of the Bhojas for waiting upon king Usinara.
And arrived before that king of unbaffled prowess, Galava addressed him,
saying, 'This maiden will bear thee two royal sons. And, O king,
begetting upon her two sons equal unto the Sun and the Moon, thou mayst
attain all thy objects both here and hereafter. As her dower, however, O
thou that art conversant with every duty, thou shalt have to give me four
hundred steeds of lunar splendour, each having ear black of hue. This
effort of mine for obtaining the steeds is only on account of my
preceptor, otherwise I myself have nothing to do with them. If thou art
able to accept (my terms), do as I bid thee without any hesitation. O
royal sage, thou art now childless. Beget, O king, a couple of children.
With offspring so begot as a raft, save they Pitris and thyself also. O
royal sage, he that hath fruit in the shape of offspring to enjoy, never
falleth from heaven. Nor hath such a person to go to that frightful hell
whither the childless are doomed to go.' Hearing these and other words of
Galava, king Usinara. replied unto him, saying, 'I have heard what thou,
O Galava, hast said. My heart also is inclined to do thy bidding. The
Supreme Ordainer, however, is all-powerful. I have only two hundred
steeds of the kind indicated by thee, O best of Brahmanas. Of other
kinds, I have many thousands moving about in my dominions. I will, O
Galava, beget only one son upon her, by treading the path that hath been
told by others such as Haryyaswa and Divodasa. I will act after their
manner in the matter of the dower. O best of Brahmanas, my wealth exists
for only my subjects residing in the city and the country, and not for my
own comforts and enjoyment. That king, O virtuous one, who giveth away
for his own pleasure the wealth that belongeth to others, can never earn
virtue or fame. Let this maiden, endued with the radiance of a celestial
girl, be presented to me. I will accept her for begetting only one
child.' Hearing these and many other words that Usinara spoke, that best
of Brahmanas, Galava, then applauded the monarch and gave him the maiden.
And making Usinara accept that damsel, Galava went into the woods. And
like a righteous man enjoying the prosperity (won by his deeds), Usinara
began to sport with and enjoy that damsel in valleys and dales of
mountains by fountains and falls of rivers, in mansions, delightful
chambers, variegated gardens, forests and woods, agreeable places, and
terraces of houses. And, in due time, was born unto him a son of the
splendour of the morning sun, who afterwards became an excellent king,
celebrated by the name Sivi. And after the birth of that son, the
Brahmana Galava came to Usinara, and taking back from him the maiden
went, O king, to see the son of Vinata.'"
