SECTION CXX
"Narada said, 'King Yayati then, desirous again of disposing of his
daughter in Swayamvara, went to a hermitage on the confluence of the
Ganga and the Yamuna, taking Madhavi with him on a chariot, her person
decked with garlands of flowers. And both Puru and Yadu followed their
sister to that sacred asylum. And in that spot was assembled a vast
concourse of Nagas and Yakshas and human beings, of Gandharvas and
animals and birds, and of dwellers of mountains and trees and forests,
and of many inhabitants of that particular province. And the woods all
around that asylum were filled with numerous Rishis resembling Brahman
himself. And while the selection had commenced of husband, that maiden of
the fairest complexion, passing over all the bridegrooms there assembled,
selected the forest as her lord. Descending from her chariot and saluting
all her friends, the daughter of Yayati went into the forest which is
always sacred, and devoted herself to ascetic austerities. Reducing her
body by means of fasts of various kinds and religious rites and rigid
vows, she adopted the deer's mode of life And subsisting upon soft and
green grass-blades, resembling the sprouts of lapis lazuli and which were
both bitter and sweet to the taste, and drinking the sweet, pure, cool,
crystal, and very superior water of sacred mountain-streams, and
wandering with the deer in forests destitute of lions and tigers, in
deserts free from forest-conflagration, and in thick woods, that maiden,
leading the life of a wild doe, earned great religious merit by the
practice of Brahmacharya austerities.
'(Meanwhile) king Yayati, following the practice of kings before him,
submitted to the influence of Time, after having lived for many thousands
of years. The progeny of two of his sons--those foremost of men--Puru and
Yadu, multiplied greatly, and in consequence thereof, Nahusha's son won
great respect both in this and the other world. O monarch, dwelling in
heaven, king Yayati, resembling a great Rishi, became an object of much
regard, and enjoyed the highest fruits of those regions. And after many
thousands of years had passed away in great happiness, on one occasion
while seated among the illustrious royal sages and great Rishis, king
Yayati, from folly, ignorance, and pride, mentally disregarded all the
gods and Rishis, and all human beings. Thereat the divine Sakra--the
slayer of Vala--at once read his heart. And those royal sages also
addressed him saying, 'Fie, fie.' And beholding the son of Nahusha, the
questions were asked, 'Who is this person? What king's son is he? Why is
he in heaven? By what acts hath he won success? Where did he earn ascetic
merit? For what hath he been known here? Who knoweth him? The dwellers of
heaven, thus speaking of-that monarch, asked one another these questions
about Yayati, that ruler of men. And hundreds of heaven's charioteers,
and hundreds of those that kept heaven's gates, and of those what were in
charge of heaven's seats, thus questioned, all answered, 'We do not know
him.' And the minds of all were temporarily clouded, so that none
recognised the king and thereupon the monarch was soon divested of his
splendour.'"
