SECTION CXVII
"Narada said, 'Galava then, addressing Madhavi, said, The ruler of the
Kasis is an illustrious king known by the name of Divodasa. He is the son
of Bhimasena, is endued with great prowess, and is a mighty sovereign. O
blessed maiden, we are now going to him. Follow me slowly and grieve not.
That ruler of men is virtuous and devoted to truth and hath his passions
under control.'
"Narada Continued, 'When the muni came before that king he was received
with due hospitality by the latter. Galava, then, began to urge the
monarch for begetting a child. Thus addressed, Divodasa said, 'I heard of
all this before. Thou needest not speak much. O Brahmana. I may tell
thee, O best of Brahmanas, that as soon as I heard of this matter, my
heart was set upon it. This also is a mark of great honour to me that
passing over all other kings thou hast come to me, Without doubt, thy
object will be gained. In the matter of the steeds, O Galava, my wealth
is like that of king Haryyaswa. I shall, therefore, beget only one royal
son upon this maiden.' Hearing these words, that best of Brahmanas gave
that damsel unto the king, and, the king, thereupon, duly wedded her. And
the royal sage then sported with her, as Surya with Prabhavati, Agni with
Swaha, Vasava with Sachi, Chandra with Rohini, Yama with Urmila, Varuna
with Gauri, Kuvera with Riddhi, Narayana with Lakshmi, Sagara with
Jahnavi, Rudra with Rudrani, the Grandsire with Saraswati, Vasishtha's
son Saktri with Adrisyanti, Vasishtha with Arundhati (called also
Akshamala), Chyavana with Sukanya, Pulastya with Sandhya, Agastya with
the princess of Vidarbha Lopamudra, Satyavan with Savitri, Bhrigu with
Puloma, Kasyapa with Aditi, Richika's son Jamadagni with Renuka, Kusika's
son Viswamitra with Himavati, Vrihaspati with Tara, Sukra with Sataprava,
Bhumipati with Bhumi, Pururavas with Urvasi, Richika with Satyavati, Manu
with Saraswati, Dushyanta with Sakuntala, the eternal Dharma with Dhriti,
Nala with Damayanti, Narada, with Satyavati, Jaratkaru with Jaratkaru,
Pulastya with Pratichya, Urnayus with Menaka, Tumvuru with Rambha, Vasuki
with Satasirsha, Dhananjaya with Kamari, Rama with the princess of Videha
Sita, or Janardana with Rukmini. And unto king Divodasa, that sporting
with and taking delight in her, Madhavi bore a son named Pratardana. And
after she had borne him a son, the holy Galava came to Divodasa at the
appointed time, and said unto him, 'Let the maiden come with me, and let
the steeds also thou art to give me remain with thee, for I desire to go
elsewhere, O ruler of Earth, for dower.' Thus addressed, the virtuous
king Divodasa, who was devoted to truth, thereupon, gave back the maiden
to Galava at the appointed time.'"
