SECTION CXXXIII
"Kunti said, 'In this connection, O chastiser of foes, is cited an old
story of the conversation between Vidula and her son. It behoveth thee to
say unto Yudhishthira anything that can be gathered from this or anything
more beneficial than that.
'There was a high-born dame of great foresight, named Vidula. She was
famous, slightly wrathful, of crooked disposition, and devoted to
Kshatriya virtues. Well-educated, she was known to all the kings of the
earth. Of great learning, she had listened to the speeches and
instructions of diverse mien. And the princess Vidula, one day, rebuked
her own son, who, after his defeat by the king of the Sindhus, lay
prostrate with heart depressed by despair. And she said, 'Thou art not my
son, O enhancer of the joys of foes. Begotten thou hast not been by
myself and thy father! Whence hast thou come? Without wrath as thou art,
thou canst not be counted as a man. Thy features betray thee to be a
eunuch. Sinkest thou in despair as long as thou livest? If thou art
desirous of thy own welfare, bear thou the burthen (of thy affairs on thy
shoulders), Do not disgrace thy soul. Do not suffer it to be gratified
with a little. Set thy heart on thy welfare, and be not afraid. Abandon
thy fears. Rise, O coward. Do not lie down thus, after thy defeat,
delighting all thy foes and grieving the friends, and reft of all sense
of honour. Little streams are filled up with only a quantity of water.
The palms of a mouse are filled with only a small quantity. A coward is
soon gratified, with acquisitions that are small. Rather perish in
plucking the fangs of a snake than die miserable like a dog. Put forth
thy prowess even at the risk of thy life. Like a hawk that fearlessly
rangeth the sky, do thou also wander fearlessly or put forth thy prowess,
or silently watch thy foes for an opportunity. Why dost thou lie down
like a carcass or like one smitten by thunder? Rise, O coward, do not
slumber after having been vanquished by the foe. Do not disappear from
the sight of all so miserably. Make thyself known by thy deeds. Never
occupy the intermediate, the low, or the lowest station. Blaze up (like a
well-fed fire). Like a brand of Tinduka wood, blaze up even for a moment,
but never smoulder from desire, like a flameless fire of paddy chaff. It
is better to blaze up for a moment than smoke for ever and ever. Let no
son be born in a royal race, who is either exceedingly fierce or
exceedingly mild. Repairing to the field of battle and achieving every
great feat that is possible for man to achieve, a brave man is freed from
the debt he oweth to the duties of the Kshatriya order. Such a person
never disgraceth his own self. Whether he gaineth his object or not, he
that is possessed of sense never indulgeth in grief. On the other hand,
such a person accomplisheth what should be next done, without caring for
even his life. Therefore, O son, display thy prowess, or obtain that end
which is inevitable. Why, Indeed, dost thou live, disregarding the duties
of thy order? All thy religious rites, O eunuch, and all thy achievements
are gone. The every root of all thy enjoyments is cut off. What for then
dost thou live? If fall and sink one must, he should seize the foe by the
hips (and thus fall with the foe). Even if one's roots are cut off, he
should not yet give way to despair. Horse of high mettle put forth all
their prowess for dragging or bearing heavy weights. Remembering their
behaviour, muster, all thy strength and sense of honour. Know also in
what thy manliness consists. Exert thyself in raising that race which
hath sunk, in consequence of thee. He that hath not achieved a great feat
forming the subject of men's conversation, only increaseth the number of
population. He is neither man nor woman. He whose fame is not founded in
respect of charity, asceticism, truth, learning and acquisition of
wealth, is only his mother's excreta. On the other hand, he that
surpasseth others in learning, asceticism, wealth, prowess, and deeds, is
(truly) a man. It behoveth thee not to adopt the idle, wretched,
infamous, and miserable profession of mendicancy that is worthy only of a
coward. Friends never derive any happiness on obtaining that weak person
for a friend, at whose sight foes are delighted, who is despised by men,
who is without seats and robes, who is gratified with small acquisitions,
who is destitute, and who hath no courage, and is low. Alas, exiled from
our kingdom, driven from home, deprived of all means of enjoyment and
pleasure, and destitute, of resources, we shall have to perish from want
of the very means of life! Misbehaving in the midst of those that are
good, and the destroyer of thy race and family, by bringing thee forth, O
Sanjaya, I have brought forth Kali himself in the shape of a son. Oh, let
no woman bring forth such a son (as thou) that art without wrath, without
exertion, without energy, and that art the joy of foes. Do not smoulder.
Blaze thou up, effectively displaying thy prowess. Slay thy foes. For but
a moment, for ever so small a space of time, blaze thou up on the heads
of thy enemies. He is a man who cherisheth wrath and forgiveth not. He,
on the other hand, who is forgiving and without wrath, is neither a man
nor woman. Contentment and softness of heart and these two, viz., want of
exertion and fear, are destructive of prosperity. He that is without
exertion never winneth what is great. Therefore, O son, free thyself, by
thy own exertions, from these faults that lead to defeat and downfall.
Steel thy heart and seek to recover thy own. A man is called Purusha
because he is competent to trouble his foe (param). He, therefore, who
liveth like a woman is misnamed Purusha (man). A brave king of mighty
strength, and who moveth like a lion, may go the way of all creatures.
The subjects, however, that reside in his dominions do not yet become
unhappy. That king, who, disregarding his own happiness and pleasures,
seeketh the prosperity of his kingdom, succeedeth soon in gladdening his
counsellors and friends.'
"Hearing these words, the son said, 'If thou dost not behold me, of what
use would the whole earth be to thee, of what use thy ornaments, of what
use all the means of pleasure and even life itself?' The mother said,
'Let those regions be obtained by our foes which belong to those that are
low. Let those again that are friends go to those regions which are
obtainable by persons whose souls are held in respect. Do not adopt the
course of life that is followed by those wretched persons, who, destitute
of strength, and without servants and attendants (to do their bidding)
live upon the food supplied by others. Like the creatures of the earth
that depend on the clouds, or the gods depending on Indra, let the
Brahmanas and thy friends all depend on thee for their sustenance. His
life, O Sanjaya, is not vain on whom all creatures depend for their
sustenance, like birds repairing to a tree abounding with ripe fruits.
The life of that brave man is, indeed, praiseworthy, through whose
prowess friends derive happiness, like the gods deriving happiness
through the prowess of Sakra. That man who liveth in greatness depending
on the prowess of his own arms, succeedeth in winning fame in this world
and blessed state in the next!'"
