SECTION CXXIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Krishna, king Dhritarashtra
lost no time in addressing Vidura, who was conversant with all dictates
of virtue. And the king said, 'Go, O child, unto Gandhari, possessed of
great wisdom and foresight and bring her hither. With her I will solicit
this wicked-hearted (son of mine). If she can pacify this wicked wretch,
of evil heart, we may yet be able to act according to the words of our
friend Krishna. It may be that speaking words in recommendation of peace,
she may yet succeed in pointing out the right path to this fool,
afflicted by avarice and having wicked allies, If she can dispel this
great and dreadful calamity (about to be) occasioned by Duryodhana, it
will then conduce to the attainment and preservation of happiness and
peace for ever and ever.' Hearing these words of the king, Vidura, at
Dhritarashtra's command, brought (thither) Gandhari, possessed of great
foresight. And Dhritarashtra then addressed Gandhari and said, 'Behold, O
Gandhari, this thy son of wicked soul, transgressing all my commands, is
about to sacrifice both sovereignty and life in consequence of his lust
for sovereignty. Of wicked soul and little understanding, he hath, like
one of uncultivated mind, left the court, with his sinful counsellors,
disregarding his superiors and setting at naught the words of his
well-wishers.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of her husband, that princess of
great fame, Gandhari, desirous of what was highly beneficial, said these
words, 'Bring hither, without loss of time, that kingdom-coveting, sick
son of mine. He that is of uncultivated heart and sacrificeth both virtue
and profit, doth not deserve to govern a kingdom. For all that, however,
Duryodhana, who is destitute of humility hath, by every means, obtained a
kingdom. Indeed, O Dhritarashtra, thou so fond of thy son, art very much
to be blamed for this, for knowing well his sinfulness, thou followest
yet his counsel. That son of thine, completely possessed by lust and
wrath is now the slave of delusion, and is, therefore, incapable, O king,
of being now forcibly turned back by thee. Thou art now reaping the
fruit, O Dhritarashtra, of having made over the kingdom to an ignorant
fool of wicked soul, possessed by avarice and having wicked counsellors.
Why is the king indifferent (today) to that disunion, which is about to
take place between persons related so closely? Indeed, beholding thee
disunited with those that are thy own, thy enemies will laugh at thee.
Who is there that would use force for getting over that calamity, O king,
which can be overcome by conciliation and gift?'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'Kshattri then, and at Dhritarashtra's command,
and of his mother's also, once more caused vindictive Duryodhana to enter
the court. Expectant of his mother's words, the prince re-entered the
court, with eyes red as copper from wrath, and breathing heavily as a
snake. And beholding her son, who was treading in a wrong path, enter the
court, Gandhari rebuked him severely and said these words for bringing
about peace.'
"Gandhari said, 'O Duryodhana, attend, O dear son, to these words of mine
that are beneficial to thee as also to all thy followers,--words that
thou art competent to obey and that will conduce to thy happiness. O
Duryodhana, obey thou the words of thy well-wishers, those words, viz.,
which that best of the Bharatas--thy father--and Bhishma, and Drona, and
Kripa, and Kshattri, have spoken. If thou makest peace, thou wouldst by
that render homage to Bhishma, to thy father, to me, and to all thy
well-wishers with Drona at their head. O thou of great wisdom, nobody, O
best of the Bharatas, succeedeth by his own desire alone in acquiring and
keeping or enjoying a kingdom. One that hath not his senses under
control, cannot enjoy sovereignty for any length of time. He that hath
his soul under control and is endued with great intelligence, can rule a
kingdom. Lust and wrath wean away a man from his possessions and
enjoyments. Conquering these foes first, a king bringeth the earth under
his subjection. Sovereignty over men is a great thing. Those that are of
wicked souls may easily desire to win a kingdom, but they are not
competent to retain a kingdom (when won). He that desireth to obtain
extensive empire must bind his senses to both profit and virtue, for if
the senses are restrained, intelligence increaseth, like fire that
increaseth when fed with fuel. If not controlled, these can even slay
their possessor, like unbroken and furious horses, capable of killing an
unskilful driver. One that seeketh to conquer his counsellors without
conquering his own self, and to conquer foes without conquering his
counsellors, is soon vanquished himself and is ruined. He who conquereth
his own self first, taking it for a foe, will not seek in vain to conquer
his counsellors and enemies afterwards. Prosperity worshippeth greatly
that person who hath conquered his senses and his counsellors, who
inflicteth punishments on transgressors, who acteth after deliberation,
and who is possessed of wisdom. Lust and wrath that dwell in the body are
deprived of their strength by wisdom, like a couple of fishes ensnared in
a net with close holes. Those two in consequence of which the gods shut
the gates of heaven against one, who freed from worldly propensities is
desirous of going thither, are excited by lust and wrath. That king who
knoweth well how to conquer lust and wrath and avarice and boastfulness
and pride, can own the sovereignty of the whole earth. That king who is
desirous of gaining wealth and virtue and vanquishing his enemies, should
always be engaged in controlling his passions. Influenced by lust, or
from wrath, he that behaveth deceitfully towards his own kinsmen or
others, can never win many allies. Uniting thyself with those chastisers
of foes--the heroic sons of Pandu--who are all endued with great wisdom,
thou canst, O son, enjoy the earth in happiness. What Bhishma, the son of
Santanu, and that mighty car-warrior, Drona, have told thee is, O son,
quite true,--Krishna and Dhananjaya are invincible. Seek thou, therefore,
the protection of this mighty-armed one, this one that is not worried by
exertion, for if Kesava becometh gracious, both sides will be happy. That
min, who is not obedient to the wishes of wise and learned friends,
always seeking his prosperity, only gladdeneth his enemies. O son, there
is no good in battle, no virtue, no profit. How can it bring happiness
then? Even victory is not always certain. Do not set thy heart,
therefore, on battle. O thou of great wisdom, Bhishma and thy father and
Vahlika (formerly) gave unto the Pandavas their share (of the kingdom)
from fear. O chastiser of foes, never think of disunion with them. Thou
beholdest today the fruit of that (peaceful) cession in the fact of thy
sovereignty over the whole earth, with all its thorns removed by those
heroes. Give, O chastiser of foes, unto the son of Pandu what is their
due. If thou wishest to enjoy, with the counsellors even half (the
empire), let their share then be given unto them. Half the earth is
sufficient to yield the means of support unto thee and thy counsellors.
By acting according to the words of thy well-wishers, thou wilt, O
Bharata, win great fame. A quarrel with the sons of Pandu who are all
endued with prosperity, who have their souls under complete control, who
are possessed of great intelligence and have conquered their passions,
will only divest thee of thy great prosperity. Dispelling the wrath of
all thy well-wishers, rule thou thy kingdom as becometh thee, giving, O
bull of Bharata's race, unto the sons of Pandu the share that belongeth
to them. O son, persecution of the sons of Pandu for full thirteen years
hath been enough. Augmented by lust and wrath, quench (that fire) now, O
thou of great wisdom. Thou that covetest the wealth of the Pandavas are
not a match for them, nor this Suta's son, who is exceedingly wrathful,
nor this thy brother Dussasana. Indeed, when Bhishma and Drona and Kripa
and Karna and Bhimasena and Dhananjaya and Dhrishtadyumna will be
enraged, the population of the earth will be exterminated. Under the
influence of wrath, do not, O son, exterminate the Kurus. Let not the
wide earth be destroyed for thy sake. Of little understanding as thou
art, thou thinkest that Bhishma, and Drona, and Kripa, all others will
fight (for thee) with all their might. That will never happen, for as
regards these, that are endued with self-knowledge, their affection
towards the Pandavas and yourselves is equal. If for the sake of the
sustenance they have obtained from the king (Dhritarashtra), they consent
to yield up their very lives, they will not yet be able to cast angry
glances upon king Yudhishthira. It is never seen in this world that men
acquire wealth by avarice. Give up thy avarice then, O son, and desist, O
bull of Bharat's race.'"
