SECTION CXXXII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Entering her abode and worshipping her feet, Kesava
represented to her briefly all that had transpired in the assembly of the
Kurus. And Vasudeva said, 'Diverse words, worthy of being accepted and
fraught with reasons, were said both by myself and the Rishis, but
Duryodhana accepted them not. As regards Suyodhana and his followers,
their hour is come. With thy leave now, I shall speedily repair unto the
Pandavas. What should I say unto the Pandavas as thy instructions to
them? Tell me that, O thou endued with great wisdom. I desire to hear thy
words.'
"Kunti said, 'O Kesava, say unto king Yudhishthira of virtuous soul these
words, 'Thy virtue, O son, is decreasing greatly. Do not act vainly. O
king, like a reader of the Vedas incapable of catching their real
meaning, and, therefore, truly unlearned. Thy understanding, affected by
only the words of the Vedas, vieweth virtue alone. Cast thy eyes on the
duties of thy own order, as ordained by the Self-create. For all ruthless
deeds and for the protection of the people, from his (Brahmana's) arms
was created the Kshatriya, who is to depend upon the prowess of his own
arms. Listen, an instance is cited in this connection, that hath been
heard by me from the aged. In days of yore, Vaisravana, having been
gratified, made a gift of this Earth to the royal sage Muchukunda. The
latter without accepting the gift, said, 'I desire to enjoy that
sovereignty which is won by prowess of arms.' At this, Vaisravana was
highly delighted and filled with wonder. King Muchukunda then, fully
observing the duties of the Kshatriya order ruled this earth, having
conquered it by the prowess of his arms. Then again, a sixth part of the
virtue, practised by subjects well-protected by the king, is obtained, 'O
Bharata, by the king. The virtue again that the king himself practiseth
conferreth godhead on him, while if he perpetrateth sin, he goeth to
hell. The penal code properly applied by the ruler, maketh the four
orders adhere to their respective duties, and leadeth to an acquisition
(by the ruler himself) of virtue (profit, and salvation). When the king
properly abideth by the penal code, without making any portion of it a
dead letter, then that best of periods called the Krita Yuga setteth in.
Let not this doubt be thine, viz., whether the era is the cause of the
king, or the king the cause of the era, for (know this to be certain
that) the king is the cause of the era. It is the king that createth the
Krita, the Treta, or the Dwapara age. Indeed, it is the king that is the
cause of also the fourth Yuga (viz., the Kali). That king who causeth the
Krita age to set in, enjoyeth heaven exceedingly. That king who causeth
the Treta age to set in, doth enjoy heaven but not exceedingly. For thus
causing the Dwapara age to set in, a king enjoyeth heaven according to
his due. The king, however, who causeth the Kali age to set in, earneth
sin exceedingly. Thereupon, that king of wicked deeds resideth in hell
for countless years. Indeed, the king's sins affect the world, and the
world's sins affect him. Observe thou those kingly duties of thine that
befit thy ancestry. That is not the conduct of a royal sage in which thou
wishest to abide. Indeed, he that is stained by weakness of heart and
adhereth to compassion, and is unsteady, never obtaineth the merit born
of cherishing his subjects with love. That understanding according to
which thou art now acting was never wished (to thee) by Pandu, or myself,
or thy grandsire, while we uttered blessings on thee before; sacrifice,
gift, merit, and bravery, subjects and children, greatness of soul, and
might, and energy, these were always prayed by me for thee. Well-wishing
Brahmanas duly worshipped and gratified the gods and the Pitris for your
long life, wealth, and children, by adding Swaha and Swadha. The mother
and the father, as also the gods always desire for their children
liberality and gift and study and sacrifice and sway over subjects.
Whether all this be righteous or unrighteous, you are to practise it, in
consequence of your very birth. (Behold, O Krishna, so far from doing all
this), though born in a high race, they are yet destitute of the very
means of support, and are afflicted with misery. Hungry men, approaching
a brave and bountiful monarch, are gratified, and live by his side. What
virtue can be superior to this? A virtuous person, upon acquiring a
kingdom, should in this world make all persons his own, attaching some by
gift, some by force, and some by sweet words. A Brahmana should adopt
mendicancy; a Kshatriya should protect (subjects); a Vaisya should earn
wealth; and a Sudra should serve the other three. Mendicancy, therefore,
is forbidden to thee. Nor is agriculture suited to thee. Thou art a
Kshatriya and therefore, the protector of all in distress. Thou art to
live by the prowess of thy arms. O thou of mighty arms, recover thy
paternal share of the kingdom which thou hast lost, by conciliation, or
by working disunion among thy foes, or by gift of money or violence, or
well-directed policy. What can be a matter of greater grief than that I,
deprived of friends, should live upon food supplied by others, after
having brought thee forth, thou enhancer of the joys of friends? Fight,
according to the practices of kings. Do not sink thy ancestors (in
infamy). With thy merit worn out, do not, with thy younger brothers,
obtain a sinful end.'"
