SECTION CXXXVI
"The mother said, 'Into whatever calamity a king may fail, he should not
still betray it. Beholding the king afflicted with fright, the whole
kingdom, the army, the counsellors, all yield to fear, and all the
subjects become disunited. Some go and embrace the side of the enemy;
others simply abandon the king; and others again, that had before been
humiliated, strive to strike. They, however, that are intimate friends
wait by his side, and though desiring his welfare yet from inability to
do anything wait helplessly, like a cow whose calf hath been tethered. As
friends grieve for friends that are plunged into distress, so those
well-wishers also grieve upon beholding their lord plunged into grief.
Even thou hast many friends whom thou hadst worshipped before. Even thou
hast many friends after thy heart, who feel for thy kingdom and who
desire to take a state of thy calamities on themselves. Do not frighten
those friends, and do not suffer them to abandon thee on beholding thee
afflicted with fear. Desiring to test thy might, manliness, and
understanding, and wishing also to encourage thee, I have said all this
for enhancing thy energy. If thou understandest what I have said, and if
all I have said appears proper and sufficient, then, O Sanjaya, muster
thy patience and gird up thy lions for victory. We have a large number of
treasure-houses unknown to thee. I alone know of their existence, and no
other person. I will place all these at thy disposal. Thou hast also, O
Sanjaya, more than one friend who sympathise with thee in thy joys and
woes, and who, O hero, never retreat from the field of battle. O grinder
of foes, allies such as these, always play the part of faithful
counsellors to a person who seeketh his own welfare and desireth to
acquire what is agreeable to himself.'
"Kunti continued, 'Hearing this speech of his mother fraught with
excellent words, and sense, the despair that had overtaken Sanjaya's
heart left instantly, although that prince was not gifted with great
intelligence. And the son said, 'When I have thee that are so observant
of my future welfare for my guide, I shall certainly either rescue my
paternal kingdom that is sunk in water or perish in the attempt. During
thy discourse I was almost a silent listener. Now and then only I
interposed a word. It was, however, only with the view of drawing thee
out, so that I might hear more on the subject. I have not been satiated
with thy words, like a person not satiated with drinking amrita. Deriving
support from any allies, behold, I gird up my loins for repressing my
foes and obtaining victory.'
"Kunti continued, 'Pierced by the wordy arrows of his mother, the son
roused himself like a steed of proud mettle and achieved all that his
mother had pointed out. When a king is afflicted by foes and overcome
with despair, his minister should make him hear this excellent history
that enhanceth energy and inspireth might. Indeed, this history is called
Jaya and should be listened to by every one desirous of victory. Indeed,
having listened to it, one may soon subjugate the whole earth and grind
his foes. This history causeth a woman to bring forth a heroic son, the
woman quick with child that listeneth to it repeatedly, certainly giveth
birth to a hero. The Kshatriya woman that listeneth to it bringeth forth
a brave son of irresistible prowess, one that is foremost in learning,
foremost in ascetic austerities, foremost in liberality, devoted to
asceticism, blazing forth with Brahmic beauty, enumerable with the good,
radiant with effulgence, endued with great might, blessed, a mighty
car-warrior, possessed of great intelligence, irresistible (in battle),
ever victorious, invincible, a chastiser of the wicked and a protector of
all practisers of virtue.'"
