SECTION CXXXI
"Vaisampayana said, 'After Vidura had said this, Kesava, that slayer of
hostile divisions, endued with great energy, addressed Dhritarashtra's
son, Duryodhana, and said, 'From delusion, O Suyodhana, thou regardest me
to be alone, and it is for this, O thou of little understanding, that
thou seekest to make me a captive after vanquishing me by violence. Here,
however, are all the Pandavas and all the Vrishnis and Andhakas. Here are
all the Adityas, the Rudras, and the Vasus, with all the great Rishis.
Saying this Kesava, that slayer of hostile heroes burst out into a loud
laughter. And as the high-souled Sauri laughed, from his body, that
resembled a blazing fire, issued myriads of gods, each of lightning
effulgence, and not bigger than the thumb. And on his forehead appeared
Brahman, and on his breast Rudra. And on his arms appeared the regents of
the world, and from his mouth issued Agni, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the
Vasus, the Aswins, the Marutas, with Indra, and the Viswedevas. And
myriads of Yakshas, and the Gandharvas, and Rakshasas also, of the same
measure and form, issued thence. And from his two arms issued Sankarshana
and Dhananjaya. And Arjuna stood on his right, bow in hand, and Rama
stood on his left, armed with the plough. And behind him stood Bhima, and
Yudhishthira, and the two sons of Madri, and before him were all the
Andhakas and the Vrishnis with Pradyumna and other chiefs bearing mighty
weapons upraised. And on his diverse arms were seen the conch, the
discus, the mace, the bow called Saranga, the plough, the javelin, the
Nandaka, and every other weapon, all shining with effulgence, and
upraised for striking. And from his eyes and nose and ears and every part
of his body, issued fierce sparks of fire mixed with smoke. And from the
pores of his body issued sparks of fire like unto the rays of the sun.
And beholding that awful form of the high-souled Kesava, all the kings
closed their eyes with affrighted hearts, except Drona, and Bhishma, and
Vidura, endued with great intelligence, greatly blessed Sanjaya, and the
Rishis, possessed of wealth of asceticism, for the divine Janardana gave
unto them this divine sight on the occasion. And beholding in the (Kuru)
court that highly wonderful sight, celestial drums beat (in the sky) and
a floral shower fell (upon him). And the whole Earth trembled (at the
time) and the oceans were agitated. And, O bull of the Bharata's race,
all the denizens of the earth were filled with great wonder. Then that
tiger among men, that chastiser of foes, withdrew that divine and highly
wonderful, and extremely varied and auspicious form. And arm-in-arm with
Satyaki on one side and Hridika's son (Kritavarman) on the other, and
obtaining permission of the Rishis, the slayer of Madhu went out. And
during the uproar that then took place, the Rishis, Narada and others
vanquished, for repairing to their respective places. And this also was
another wonderful incident that happened. And seeing that tiger among men
leave the court, the Kauravas with all the kings followed him, like the
gods following Indra. Sauri, however, of immeasurable soul, without
bestowing a single thought on those that followed him, issued from the
court, like a blazing fire mixed with smoke. And he beheld (at the gate
his charioteer) Daruka waiting with his large white car, furnished with
rows of tinkling bells, decked with golden ornaments, and endued with
great speed, the clatter of whose wheels resounded like the rumbling of
the clouds, and which was covered all over with white tiger-skins, and
unto which were harnessed his steeds Saivya (and others). And there also
appeared, mounted on his car, that favourite hero of Vrishnis, the mighty
car-warrior Kritavarman, the son of Hridika. And that chastiser of foes,
Sauri, who had his car ready, was about to depart, king Dhritarashtra
addressed him once more and said, 'O grinder of foes, thou hast seen, O
Janardana, the power I wield over my sons! Thou hast, indeed, witnessed
all with thy own eyes. Nothing now is unknown to thee. Seeing me
endeavour to bring about peace between the Kurus, and the Pandavas, in
fact, knowing the state (in which I am), it behoveth thee not to
entertain any suspicion regarding me. O Kesava, I have no sinful feelings
towards the Pandavas. Thou knowest what words have been spoken by me to
Suyodhana. The Kauravas and all the kings of the Earth, also know, O
Madhava, that I have made every endeavour to bring about peace.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'The mighty-armed Janardana then addressed
Dhritarashtra, Drona, grandsire Bhishma, Kshattri, Vahlika, and Kripa and
said, 'Ye have yourselves witnessed all that hath happened in the
assembly of the Kurus, viz., how wicked Duryodhana, like an uneducated
wretch, left the court from anger, and how king Dhritarashtra also
describeth himself to be powerless. With the permission of you all, I
shall now go back to Yudhishthira.' Saluting them, that bull amongst men,
Sauri then mounted his car and set out. And those heroic bulls amongst
the Bharatas, those mighty bowmen, viz., Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa, and
Kshattri, and Aswatthaman and Vikarna, and that mighty car-warrior
Yuyutsu, all began to follow him. And Kesava, on his large white car,
furnished with rows of tinkling bells, proceeded then, in the very sight
of the Kurus, to the abode of his paternal aunt (Kunti).'"
