SECTION CXL
"Dhritarashtra said, 'O Sanjaya, in the midst of all the princes and the
servants, the slayer of Madhu took Karna upon his car and went out (of
our city). What did that slayer of hostile heroes, that one of
immeasurable soul, say unto Radha's son? What conciliatory words did
Govinda speak unto the Suta's son? Tell me, O Sanjaya, what those words
were, mild or fierce, that Krishna, possessed of a voice deep as that of
newly-risen clouds during the rainy season said unto Karna?'
"Sanjaya said, 'Listen to me, O Bharata, as I repeat in due order those
words, both intimidating and mild, agreeable and consistent with virtue,
true and beneficial, and pleasing to the heart, which the slayer of
Madhu, of immeasurable soul, said unto Radha's son.'
"Vasudeva said, 'O son of Radha, thou hast worshipped many Brahmanas
fully conversant with the Vedas. With concentrated attention and mind
free from envy thou hast also (on many an occasion) enquired of them
after truth. Thou knowest, therefore, O Karna, what the eternal saying of
the Vedas are. Thou art also well-versed in all the subtle conclusions of
the scriptures. It is said by those conversant with the scriptures that
the two kinds of sons called Kanina and Sahoda that are born of a maiden,
have him for their father who weddeth the maid. Thou, O Karna, hast been
born in this way. Thou art, therefore, morally the son of Pandu. Come, be
a king, according to the injunction of the scriptures. On the side of thy
father, thou hast the sons of Pritha, on the side of thy mother, thou
hast the Vrishnis, (for thy kinsmen). O bull among men, know that thou
hast these two for thy own. Proceeding this very day with me hence, O
sire, let the Pandavas know thee as a son of Kunti born before
Yudhishthira. The brothers, the five Pandavas, the son of Draupadi, and
the invincible son of Subhadra, will all embrace thy feet. All the kings
and princes, again, that have been assembled for the Pandava-cause, and
all the Andhakas and Vrishnis, will also embrace thy feet. Let queens and
princesses bring golden and silver and earthen jars (full of water) and
delicious herbs and all kinds of seeds and gems, and creepers, for thy
installation. During the sixth period, Draupadi also will come to thee
(as a wife). Let that best of Brahmanas, Dhaumya, of restrained soul,
pour libations of clarified butter on the (sacred) fire, and let those
Brahmanas regarding all the four Vedas as authoritative (and who are
acting as priests unto the Pandavas), perform the ceremony of thy
installation. Let the family priest of the Pandavas who is devoted to
Vedic rites, and those bulls among men-those brothers, the five sons of
Pandu,--and the five sons of Draupadi, and the Panchalas, and the Chedis,
and myself also, install thee as the lord of the whole earth. Let
Dharma's son Yudhishthira, of righteous soul and rigid vows, be thy heir
presumptive, ruling the kingdom under thee. Holding the white chamara in
his hand (for fanning thee), let Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, ride on
the same car behind thee. After thy installation is over, let that other
son of Kunti, the mighty Bhimasena, hold the white umbrella over thy
head. Indeed, Arjuna then will drive thy car furnished with a hundred
tinkling bells, its sides covered with tiger-skins, and with white steeds
harnessed to it. Then Nakula and Sahadeva, and the five sons of Draupadi,
and the Panchalas with that mighty car-warrior Sikhandin, will all
proceed behind thee. I myself, with all the Andhakas and the Vrishnis,
will walk behind thee. Indeed, all the Dasarhas and the Dasarnas, will, O
king, be numbered with thy relatives. Enjoy the sovereignty of the earth,
O thou of mighty arms, with thy brothers the Pandavas, with yapas and
homas and auspicious rites of diverse kinds performed in thy honour. Let
the Dravidas, with the Kuntalas, the Andhras, and the Talacharas, and the
Shuchupas, and the Venupas, all walk before thee. Let chanters and
panegyrists praise thee with innumerable laudatory hymns. Let the
Pandavas proclaim,--Victory to Vasusena. Surrounded by the Pandavas, like
the moon by the stars, rule thou the kingdom, O son of Kunti, and gladden
Kunti herself. Let thy friends rejoice, and thy enemies grieve. Let there
be, this day, a brotherly union between thee and thy brothers, the sons
of Pandu."
