SECTION CXLII
"Sanjaya said, 'Hearing these words of Karna, Kesava, that slayer of
hostile heroes, spoke unto him these words smilingly, 'Do not the means
of winning an empire recommend themselves to thee. O Karna? Wishest thou
not to rule over the whole earth given by me to thee? The victory of the
Pandavas, therefore, is very certain. There seems to be no doubt in this.
The triumphal banner of Pandu's son, with the fierce ape on it, seems to
be already set up. The divine artificer, Bhaumana, hath applied such
celestial illusion (in its construction) that it standeth high, displayed
like Indra's banner. Various celestial creatures of terrific shape,
indicating victory, are seen on that standard. Extending for a yojana
upwards and all around, that beautiful standard of Arjuna, resembling
fire in radiance, is never, O Karna, when set up, obstructed by hills or
trees. When thou wilt behold in battle Arjuna, on his car drawn by white
steeds and driven by Krishna, applying Aindra, Agneya and Maruta weapons,
and when thou wilt hear the twang of Gandiva piercing the welkin like the
very thunder, then all signs of the Krita, the Treta, and the Dwapara
ages will disappear (but, instead, Kali embodied will be present). When
thou wilt behold in battle Kunti's son, invincible Yudhishthira, devoted
to Yapa and Homa and resembling the very sun in brilliance, protecting
his own mighty army and burning the army of his foes, then all signs of
the Krita, the Treta, and the Dwapara ages will disappear. When thou wilt
behold in battle the mighty Bhimasena dancing, after having quaffed the
blood of Dussasana, like a fierce elephant with rent temples after having
killed a mighty antagonist, then all signs of the Krita, the Treta, and
the Dwapara ages will disappear. When thou wilt behold in battle Arjuna
checking Drona and Santanu's son and Kripa and king Suyodhana, and
Jayadratha of Sindhu's race, all rushing fiercely to the encounter, then
all signs of the Krita, the Treta and the Dwapara ages will disappear.
When thou wilt behold in battle the two mighty sons of Madri,--those
heroic car-warriors, capable of breaking into pieces all hostile
cars,--agitating, from the very moment when weapons will begin to clash,
the army of Dhritarashtra's sons like a couple of infuriated elephants,
then all signs of the Krita, the Treta and the Dwapara ages will
disappear. Returning hence, O Karna, say unto Drona and Santanu's son and
Kripa that the present month is a delightful one, and that food, drink,
and fuel are abundant now. All plants and herbs are vigorous now, all
trees full of fruits, and flies there are none. The roads are free from
mire, and the waters are of agreeable taste. The weather is neither very
hot nor very cold and is, therefore, highly pleasant. Seven days after,
will be the day of the new moon. Let the battle commence then, for that
day, it hath been said, is presided over by Indra. Say also unto all the
kings that have come for battling that I will fully accomplish the desire
cherished by them. Indeed, all the kings and princes that are obedient to
the orders of Duryodhana, obtaining death by weapons, will attain to an
excellent state.'"
