SECTION CXXXVIII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing the words of Kunti, the mighty car-warriors,
Bhishma and Drona, then spoke these words unto the disobedient
Duryodhana, 'Hast thou, O tiger among men, heard the fierce words of
grave import, excellent and consistent with virtue, that Kunti had spoken
in the presence of Krishna? Her sons will act according to them,
especially as they are approved by Vasudeva. O Kaurava, they will not
assuredly desist, without their share of the kingdom (being given to
them). Thou hast inflicted much pain on the sons of Pritha. And Draupadi
also was afflicted by thee in the assembly. They were, however, bound
then by the bounds of truth and it was for this that, they tolerated that
treatment. Obtaining Arjuna now, who is skilled in every weapon, and
Bhima of firm resolution, and Gandiva and the couple of (inexhaustible)
quivers, and that car (of Arjuna) and that banner (bearing the device of
the ape), and Nakula and Sahadeva, both endued with great might and
energy, and Vasudeva also, as his allies, Yudhishthira will not forgive
(thee). O mighty-armed one, thou hast witnessed with thy own eyes how
intelligent Arjuna vanquished us all in battle before, in the city of
Virata. Indeed, after this, that Ape-bannered (warrior) consumed in
battle, taking up his fierce weapons, those Danavas of terrible deeds
called the Nivatakavachas. On the occasion also of the tale of cattle,
when captured by the Gandharvas, this Karna and all these thy counsellors
and thyself accoutred in mail and on thy car, were all liberated from the
grasp of the Gandharvas by that Arjuna. That is a sufficient proof.
Therefore, O foremost of the Bharatas, with all thy brothers make peace
with the sons of Pandu. Save this whole earth from the Destruction's
jaws. Yudhishthira is thy elder brother, virtuous in behaviour,
affectionate towards thee, sweet-speeched and learned. Abandoning thy
sinful intentions, unite thyself with that tiger among men. If Pandu's
son beholdeth thee divested of thy bow, and without the wrinkles of rage
on thy brow, and cheerful, even that would be for the good of our race.
Approaching with all thy counsellors embrace him fraternally. O repressor
of foes, salute the king respectfully as before. And let Yudhishthira,
the son of Kunti, the elder brother of Bhima, hold from affection, thy
saluting self with his arms. And let that foremost of smiters, Bhima,
possessed of leonine shoulders and thighs round, and long, and mighty
arms, embrace thee. And then let that son of Kunti, Dhananjaya, called
also Partha, of eyes like lotus-petals, and curly hair and conch-like
neck salute thee respectfully. Then let those tigers among men, the twin
Aswins, unrivalled on earth for beauty, wait on thee with affection and
reverence as on their preceptor. And let all the kings with him of
Dasarha's race at their head, shed tears of joy. Abandoning thy pride,
unite thyself with thy brothers. Rule thou the whole earth, with thy
brothers. Let all the kings joyfully return to their respective homes,
having embraced one another. There is no need of battle, O king of kings.
Listen to the dissuasions of thy friends. In the battle that will ensue a
great destruction of the Kshatriyas is certainly indicated. The stars are
all hostile. The animals and birds have all assumed fearful aspects.
Diverse portents, O hero, are visible, all indicating the slaughters of
the Kshatriyas. All these portents, again, are particularly visible in
our abodes. Blazing meteors are afflicting thy host. Our animals are all
cheerless and seem, O king, to be crying. Vultures are wheeling around
thy troops. Neither the city nor the palace looks as before. Jackals,
setting forth ominous yells, are running about the four quarters which
are ablaze with conflagrations. Obey thou the counsels of thy father and
mother as also of ourselves who are thy well-wishers. War and peace, O
thou of mighty arms, are within thy control. If, O grinder of foes, thou
dost not act according to the words of thy friends, thou shalt have to
repent upon beholding thy army afflicted with the arrows of Partha.
Hearing in battle the terrible yells uttered by the mighty Bhima and the
twang of Gandiva, thou wilt remember our these words. Indeed, if what we
say appears unacceptable to thee, then it will be as we say.'"
