SECTION CXLVIII
"Vasudeva said, 'After Bhishma had said these words, Drona, always
competent to speak, then addressed Duryodhana in the midst of the
(assembled) monarchs and said these words that are beneficial to thee.
And he said, 'O sire, as Pratipa's son, Santanu, was devoted to the
welfare of his race, and as Devavrata, otherwise called Bhishma was
devoted to the welfare of his race, so was the royal Pandu, that king of
the Kurus, who was firmly devoted to truth, who had his passions under
control, who was virtuous, of excellent vows, and attentive to all
duties. (Though king by right) that perpetuator of Kuru's race yet made
over the sovereignty to his elder brother, Dhritarashtra, endued with
great wisdom, and to his younger brother Kshattri (Vidura). And placing
this Dhritarashtra of unfading glory on the throne, that royal son of
Kuru's race went to the woods with his two wives. And that tiger among
men, Vidura, with great humility, placing himself in subjection to
Dhritarashtra, began to wait on him like a slave, fanning him with the
branch of a tender palm. And all the subjects then, O sire, duly tendered
their submission to king Dhritarashtra just as they had done to king
Pandu himself. And having made over the kingdom to Dhritarashtra and
Vidura, that conqueror of hostile cities, Pandu, wandered over the whole
earth. Always devoted to truth, Vidura then took charge of the finances,
gifts, superintendence of the servants (of the state), and the feeding of
all, while that conqueror of hostile cities, Bhishma, of mighty energy,
supervised the making of war and peace and the necessity of making or
withholding gifts to kings. When king Dhritarashtra of great strength was
on the throne, the high-souled Vidura was near him. Born in
Dhritarashtra's race how dost thou venture to bring about a disunion in
the family? Uniting with thy brothers (the Pandavas) enjoy all objects of
enjoyment. O king, I do not say this to you from cowardice, nor for the
sake of wealth. I am enjoying the wealth that Bhishma gave me, and not
thou, O best of kings. I do not desire, O king, to have from thee my
means of sustenance. Where Bhishma is, there Drona must be. Do what
Bhishma hath told thee. O grinder of foes, give unto the sons of Pandu
half the kingdom. O sire, I acted as their preceptor as much as thine.
Indeed, even as Aswatthaman is to me, so is Arjuna of white steeds. What
use is there of much declamation? Victory is there where righteousness
is.'
"Vasudeva continued, 'After Drona, of immeasurable energy, had said this,
the virtuous Vidura then, O king, who is devoted to truth, said these
words, turning towards his uncle (Bhishma) and looking at his face. And
Vidura said, 'O Devavrata, attend to the words I speak. This race of
Kuru, when it became extinct, was revived by thee. It is for this that
thou art indifferent to my lamentations now. In this our race, its stain
is this Duryodhana, whose inclinations are followed by thee, although he
is enslaved by avarice, and is wicked and ungrateful and deprived of his
senses by lust. The Kurus will certainly bear consequence of the acts of
that Duryodhana who transgresseth the command of his father, observant of
virtue and profit. O great king, act thou so that the Kurus may not
perish. Like a painter producing a picture, it was thou, O king, who
hadst caused me and Dhritarashtra to spring into life. The Creator,
having created creatures, destroys them again. Do not act like him.
Seeing before thy very eyes this extinction of thy race, be not
indifferent to it. If, however, thy understanding is gone in consequence
of the universal slaughter that is at hand, go then to the woods, taking
me and Dhritarashtra with thee. Otherwise, binding this very day wicked
Duryodhana that hath deceit for his wisdom, rule this kingdom with the
sons of Pandu guarding it around. Relent, O tiger among kings. A great
slaughter of the Pandavas, the Kurus, and of other kings of immeasurable
energy is before us.'
'Having said this, Vidura ceased, his heart overflowing with sorrow. And
reflecting on the matter, he began to draw repeated sighs. Then the
daughter of king Suvala, alarmed at the prospect of the destruction of a
whole race, said, from wrath, these words fraught with virtue and profit,
to cruel Duryodhana of wicked heart, in the presence of the assembled
monarchs, 'Let all the kings present in this royal assembly and let the
regenerate Rishis that form the other members of this conclave, listen
(to me) as I proclaim the guilt of thy sinful self backed by all thy
counsellors. The kingdom of the Kurus is enjoyable in due order of
succession. Even this hath always been the custom of our race. Of sinful
soul and exceedingly wicked in acts, thou seekest the destruction of the
Kuru kingdom by thy unrighteousness. Wise Dhritarashtra is in possession
of the kingdom, having Vidura of great foresight under him (as his
adviser). Passing over these two, why, O Duryodhana, dost thou, from
delusion, covet the sovereignty now? Even the high-souled king and
Kshattri, when Bhishma is alive, should both be subordinate to him.
Indeed, this foremost of men, this offspring of Ganga, the high-souled
Bhishma, in consequence of his righteousness, doth not desire the
sovereignty. It is for this reason that this invincible kingdom became
Pandu's. His sons, therefore, are masters today and no other. The
extensive kingdom, then by paternal right, belongeth to the Pandavas, and
their sons and grandsons in due order. Observing the customs of our race
and the rule with respect to our kingdom, we all fully accomplish that
which this high-souled and wise chief of the Kurus, Devavrata, firmly
adhering to truth, sayeth, 'Let this king (Dhritarashtra) and Vidura
also, at the command of Bhishma of great vows, proclaim the same thing.
Even that is an act that should be done by those that are well-wishers
(of this race). Keeping virtue in front, let Yudhishthira, the son of
Dharma, guided by king Dhritarashtra and urged by Santanu's son, rule for
many long years this kingdom of the Kurus lawfully obtainable by him.'"
