SECTION CXLVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'Coming back to Upaplavya from Hastinapura, that
chastiser of foes, Kesava, represented unto the Pandavas all that had
happened, and conferring with them for a long space of time, and holding
repeated consultations, Sauri went to his own quarters for rest. And
dismissing all the kings, with Virata and others at their heads, the five
brothers--the Pandavas--when the sun had set, said their evening prayers.
And with hearts ever fixed on Krishna they began to think of him. And, at
last, bringing Krishna of Dasarha's race into their midst, they began to
deliberate again about what they should do. And Yudhishthira said, 'O
thou of eyes like lotus-petals, it behoveth thee to tell us all that thou
saidst unto Dhritarashtra's son in the assembly (of the Kurus), having
gone to Nagapura.' Vasudeva said, 'Having gone to Nagapura, I addressed
Dhritarashtra's son in the assembly such words as were true, reasonable,
and beneficial. That wicked minded fellow did not, however, accept them.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'When Duryodhana desired to tread along the wrong
path, what did the aged Kuru grandsire say, O Hrishikesa, unto that
vindictive prince? What also did the highly-blessed preceptor--the son of
Bharadwaja, say? And what did his parents Dhritarashtra and Gandhari say?
What did our junior father Kshattri, who is the foremost of all persons
conversant with virtue, and who is always afflicted with sorrow on
account of ourselves whom he regards as his sons, say unto
Dhritarashtra's son? What also did all the kings who sat in that assembly
say? O Janardana, say it all unto us, exactly as it happened. Thou hast
already told us all the disagreeable words that the Kuru chiefs (Bhishma
and Dhritarashtra) and others in that assembly of the Kurus said unto the
wicked Duryodhana who is overwhelmed with lust and covetousness, and who
regardeth himself wise. Those words, however, O Kesava, have flitted away
from my memory. O Govinda, I desire to hear, O lord, all those words
again. Act thou in such a way that the opportunity may not pass away.
Thou, O Krishna, art our refuge, thou art our lord, thou art our guide!'
"Vasudeva said, 'Hear, O king, the words that were addressed to king
Suyodhana in the midst of the assembly of the Kurus, and, O king of
kings, bear them in thy mind. After my words were ended, Dhritarashtra's
son laughed aloud. Highly incensed at this, Bhishma then said, 'Hear, O
Duryodhana, what I say for (the preservation of) our race, and having
heard it, O tiger among kings, do what is beneficial to thy own house. O
sire, O king, my father Santanu, was widely known in the world. I was, at
first, his only son. A desire sprung up in his heart as to how he might
obtain a second son, for the wise say that an only son is no son,--Let
not my race be extinct may my fame be spread. Even this was his desire.
Knowing this to have been his desire, I procured Kali to become my
mother, having myself made a promise highly difficult to observe, for the
sake of my father as also for the sake of our race. How, in consequence
of that promise I could not be king and have drawn up my vital seed, are,
of course, well-known to thee. (I do not grieve for that). Observing that
vow of mine, behold, I am living in happiness and joy. In her, O king,
was born my younger brother, that mighty-armed and handsome supporter of
Kuru's race, viz., Vichitravirya of virtuous soul. After my father's
ascension to heaven, I installed Vichitravirya as a ruler of the kingdom,
that was mine, while I placed myself under him as a servant of his. O
king of kings, I then brought him suitable wives, having vanquished many
assembled monarchs. Thou hast heard of it often. Sometime after, I was
engaged in a single combat with the (great) Rama. From fear of Rama, my
brother fled, the more so as his subject deserted him. During this
period, he became very much attached to his wives and accordingly had an
attack of phthisis. Upon his death, there was anarchy in the kingdom and
the chief of the gods poured not a drop of rain (on the realm).' The
subjects then, afflicted by fear of hunger, hastened to me and said, 'Thy
subjects are on the point of being exterminated. Be thou our king for the
sake of our good. Dispel this drought. Blessed be thou, O perpetuator of
Santanu's race. Thy subjects are being greatly afflicted by severe and
frightful maladies. Very few of them are still alive. It behoveth thee, O
son of Ganga, to save them. Dispel these tortures. O hero, cherish thy
subjects righteously. When thou art alive, let not the kingdom go to
destruction.' Hearing these words of theirs uttered in a weeping voice,
my heart was undisturbed. Remembering the behaviour of good, I desired to
maintain my vow. Then, O king, the citizens, my auspicious mother Kali
herself, our servants, the priests and the preceptors (of our house), and
many Brahmanas of great learning, all afflicted with great woe, solicited
me to occupy the throne.' And they said, 'When thou art alive, shall the
kingdom, ruled by Pratipa (of old), go to ruin? O thou of magnanimous
heart, be thou the king for our good.' Thus addressed by them, I joined
my hands together and, myself filled with grief and greatly afflicted, I
represented to them the vow I had made from filial respect. I repeatedly
informed them that for the sake of our race, I had vowed to live with
vital seed drawn up and foreswearing the throne. It was especially for my
mother, again, that I did so. I, therefore, begged them not to put me to
the yoke. I again joined my hands and conciliated my mother, saying, 'O
mother, begot by Santanu and being a member of Kuru's race, I cannot
falsify my promise.' I repeatedly told her this. And, O king, I said
further, It is for thee especially, O mother, that I took this vow; I am
verily thy servant and slave, O mother, thou that art distinguished for
parental affection.' Having begged my mother and the people thus, I then
solicited the great sage Vyasa for begetting children upon the wives of
my brother. Indeed, O king, both myself and my mother gratified that
Rishi. At last, O king, the Rishi granted our prayers in the matter of
the children. And he begot three sons in all, O best of Bharata's race.
Thy father was born blind, and in consequence of this congenital defect
of a sense, he could not become king. The high-souled and celebrated
Pandu became king. And when Pandu became king, his sons must obtain their
paternal inheritance. O sire, do not quarrel, give them half the kingdom.
When I am alive, what other man is competent to reign? Do not disregard
my words. I only wish that there should be peace amongst you. O sire, O
king, I make no distinction between thee and then (but love all of you
equally). What I have said unto thee represents also the opinion of thy
father, of Gandhari, and also of Vidura. The words of those that are old
should always be listened to. Do not disregard these words of mine. Do
not destroy all thou hast and the earth also.'"
