SECTION CXLX
"Vasudeva said, 'Though thus addressed by Bhishma, and Drona, and Vidura,
and Gandhari, and Dhritarashtra, that wicked wight could not yet be
brought to his senses. On the other hand, the wicked Duryodhana,
disregarding them all, rose (and left the assembly) with eyes red in
anger. And all the kings (invited by him), prepared to lay down their
lives, followed him behind. King Duryodhana then repeatedly ordered those
wicked-hearted rulers, saying, 'Today constellation Pushya is
ascendant--march ye (this very day) to Kurukshetra. Impelled by Fate,
those monarchs then, with their soldiers, gladly set out, making Bhishma
their generalissimo. Eleven Akshauhinis of troops have been, O King,
assembled for the Kauravas. At the head of that host, shineth Bhishma,
with the device of the palmyra on the banner of his car. In view,
therefore, of What hath happened, do now, O monarch, that which seemeth
to be proper. I have told thee, O king, everything that, O Bharata, that
was said by Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, Gandhari and Dhritarashtra, in my
presence. The arts beginning with conciliation were all, O king, employed
by me from desire of establishing brotherly feelings (between yourselves
and your cousins), for the preservation of this race, and for the growth
and prosperity of the (earth's) population. When conciliation failed, I
employed the art of (producing) dissensions and mentioned, ye Pandavas,
all your ordinary and extraordinary feats. Indeed, when Suyodhana showed
no respect for the conciliatory words, (I spoke), I caused all the kings
to be assembled together and endeavoured to produce dissension (amongst
them). Extraordinary and awful and terrible and superhuman indications,
O, Bharata, were then manifested by me. O lord, rebuking all the kings,
making a straw of Suyodhana, terrifying Radha's son and repeatedly
censuring Suvala's son for the gambling match of Dhritarashtra's sons,
and once again endeavouring to disunite all the kings by means of both
words and intrigues, I again had recourse to conciliation. For the unity
of Kuru's race and in view of the special requirements of the business
(at hand), I spoke also of gift. Indeed, I said, 'Those heroes, the sons
of Pandu, sacrificing their pride, will live in dependence on
Dhritarashtra, Bhishma and Vidura. Let the kingdom be given to thee. Let
them have no power. Let: it all be as the king (Dhritarashtra), as
Ganga's son (Bhishma) and as Vidura say for thy good. Let the kingdom be
thine. Relinquish but five villages (to the Pandavas). O best of kings,
without doubt they deserve to be supported by thy father. Though
addressed thus, that wicked soul do not still give you your share. I,
therefore, see that chastisement, and nothing else, is now the means that
should be employed against those sinful persons. Indeed, all those kings
have already marched to, Kurukshetra. I have now told thee everything
that had happened in the assembly of the Kurus. They will not, O son of
Pandu, give thee thy kingdom without battle. With death waiting before
them, they have all become the cause of a universal destruction.'"
