SECTION CLIX
"Vaisampayana said, 'About this time, there came into the Pandava camp
Bhishmaka's son, foremost among all persons of truthful resolution, and
known widely by the name of Rukmi. The high-souled Bhishmaka, who was
otherwise called king Hiranyaroman, was the friend of Indra. And he was
most illustrious among the descendants of Bhoja and was the ruler of the
whole southern country. And Rukmi was a disciple of that lion among the
Kimpurushas who was known by the name of Drona, having his abode on the
mountains of Gandhamadana. And he had learnt from his preceptor the whole
science of weapons with its four divisions. And that mighty-armed warrior
had obtained also the bow named Vijaya of celestial workmanship,
belonging to the great Indra, and which was equal to Gandiva in energy
and to also Sarnga (held by Krishna). There were three celestial bows
owned by the denizens of heaven, viz., Gandiva owned by Varuna, the bow
called Vijaya owned by Indra, and that other celestial bow of great
energy said to have been owned by Vishnu. This last (Sarnga), capable of
striking fear into the hearts of hostile warriors, was held by Krishna.
The bow called Gandiva was obtained by Indra's son (Arjuna) from Agni on
the occasion of the burning of Khandava, while the bow called Vijaya was
obtained from Drona by Rukmi of great energy. Baffling the nooses of Mura
and slaying by his might that Asura, and vanquishing Naraka, the son of
the Earth, Hrishikesa, while recovering the begemmed ear-rings (of
Aditi), with sixteen thousand girls and various kinds of jewels and gems,
obtained that excellent bow called Sarnga. And Rukmi having obtained the
bow called Vijaya whose twang resembled the roar of the clouds came to
the Pandavas, as if inspiring the whole universe with dread. Formerly,
proud of the might of his own arms, the heroic Rukmi could not tolerate
the ravishment of his sister Rukmini by wise Vasudeva. He had set out in
pursuit, having sworn that he would not return without having slain
Janardana. And accompanied by a large army consisting of four kinds of
forces that occupied (as it marched) a very large portion of the earth,
accoutred in handsome coats of mail and armed with diverse weapons and
resembling the swollen current of the Ganga, that foremost of all
wielders of weapons set out in pursuit of Vasudeva of Vrishni's race. And
having come up to him of Vrishni's race who was lord and master of
everything obtainable by ascetic austerities, Rukmi, O king, was
vanquished and covered with shame. And for this he returned not to (his
city) Kundina. And on the spot where that slayer of hostile heroes was
vanquished by Krishna, he built an excellent city named Bhojakata. And, O
king, that city filled with large forces and teeming with elephants,
steeds., is widely known on the earth by that name. Endued with great
energy, that hero, cased in mail and armed with bows, fences, swords and
quivers, quickly entered the Pandava camp, surrounded by an Akshauhini of
troops. And Rukmi entered that vast army, under a standard effulgent as
the sun, and made himself known to the Pandavas, from desire of doing
what was agreeable to Vasudeva. King Yudhishthira, advancing a few steps,
offered him worship. And duly worshipped and eulogised by the Pandavas,
Rukmi saluted them in return and rested for a while with his troops. And
addressing Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti in the midst of the heroes there
assembled, he said, 'If, O son of Pandu, thou art afraid, I am here to
render thee assistance in the battle. The assistance I will give thee
will be unbearable by thy foes. There is no man in this world who is
equal to me in prowess. I will slay those foes of thine whom thou, O son
of Pandu, wilt assign to me. I will slay one of those heroes, viz., Drona
and Kripa, and Bhishma, and Karna. Or, let all these kings of the earth
stand aside. Slaying in battle thy foes myself, I will give thee Earth.'
And he said this in the presence of king Yudhishthira the Just and of
Kesava and in the hearing of the (assembled) monarchs and all others (in
the camp). Then casting his eyes on Vasudeva and Pandu's son king
Yudhishthira the Just, Dhananjaya the intelligent son of Kunti smilingly
but in a friendly voice said these words, 'Born in the race of Kuru,
being especially the son of Pandu, naming Drona as my preceptor, having
Vasudeva for my ally, and bearing, besides the bow called Gandiva, how
can I say that I am afraid? O hero, when on the occasion of the tale 'of
cattle, I fought with the mighty Gandharvas, who was there to assist me?
In that terrific encounter also with the Gods and Danavas banded together
in great numbers at Khandava, who was my ally when I fought? When, again,
I fought with the Nivatakavachas and with those other Danavas called
Kalakeyas, who was my ally? When, again, at Virata's city I fought with
the numberless Kurus, who was my ally in that battle? Having paid my
respects, for battle's sake, to Rudra, Sakra, Vaisravana, Yama, Varuna,
Pavaka, Kripa, Drona, and Madhava, and wielding that tough celestial bow
of great energy called Gandiva, and accoutred with inexhaustible arrows
and armed with celestial weapons, how can a person like me, O tiger among
men, say, even unto Indra armed with the thunderbolt, such words as I am
afraid!--words that rob one of all his fame? O thou of mighty arms, I am
not afraid, nor have I any need of thy assistance. Go therefore, or stay,
as it pleaseth or suiteth thee.' Hearing these words of Arjuna, Rukmi
taking away with him his army vast as the sea, repaired then, O bull of
Bharata's race, to Duryodhana. And king Rukmi, repairing thither, said
the same words unto Duryodhana. But that king proud of his bravery,
rejected him in the same way.
'Thus, O king, two persons withdrew from the battle, viz., Rohini's son
(Rama) of Vrishni's race and king Rukmi. And after Rama had set out on
his pilgrimage to the tirthas, and Bhishmaka's son Rukmi had departed
thus, the sons of Pandu once more sat down for consulting with one
another. And that conclave presided over by king Yudhishthira the Just,
abounding with numerous monarchs, blazed forth like the firmament
bespangled with lesser luminaries with the moon in their midst.'"
