SECTION CLXV
'Sanjaya said, 'Having listened to Uluka's words, Yudhishthira, the son
of Kunti, moved his army headed by Dhrishtadyumna and others. And that
vast army commanded by Dhrishtadyumna, consisting of four kinds of
forces, viz., foot-soldiers and elephants and cars and cavalry, terrible,
and immovable like the earth herself, and guarded by mighty car-warriors
led by Bhimasena and Arjuna, could be compared to the vast ocean lying in
stillness. And at the head of that vast force was that mighty bowman, the
prince of Panchalas, invincible in battle, viz., Dhrishtadyumna, desirous
of obtaining Drona for his antagonist. And Dhrishtadyumna began to select
combatants (from his own army) for pitting them against particular
warriors of the hostile force. And he gave orders unto his car-warriors,
suited to their strength and courage. And he pitted Arjuna against the
Suta's son (Karna), Bhima against Duryodhana, Dhrishtaketu against Salya,
Uttamaujas against Gautama's son (Kripa), Nakula against Kritavarman,
Yuyudhana against the ruler of the Sindhus (Jayadratha). And he placed
Sikhandin in the van, pitting him against Bhishma. And he urged Sahadeva
against Sakuni, and Chekitana against Sala, and the five sons of Draupadi
against the Trigartas. And he urged Subhadra's son (Abhimanyu) against
Vrishasena (the son of Karna), and also against all the rest of the
kings, for he regarded Abhimanyu as superior to Arjuna himself in battle.
And distributing his warriors thus, individually and collectively, that
mighty bowman, of the hue of blazing fire, kept Drona for his own share.
And that leader of leaders of troops, the mighty and intelligent bowman
Dhrishtadyumna, having arrayed his troops duly, waited for battle with a
firm heart. And having arrayed the combatants, as indicated above, of the
Pandavas, he waited, with collected mind, on the field for securing
victory to the sons of Pandu.'"
