SECTION CLXXII
"Bhishma said, 'That subjugator of hostile cities, Sikhandin, the son of
the king of the Panchalas, is, O king, in my judgment, one of the
foremost of Yudhishthira's Rathas. Having divested himself on his former
sex, he will fight in battle and earn great fame, O Bharata, among thy
troops! He hath a large number of troops,--Panchalas and
Prabhadrakas,--to support him. With those hosts of cars he will achieve
great feats. Dhrishtadyumna also, O Bharata, the leader of all
Yudhishthira's army, that mighty car-warrior who is also a disciple of
Drona, is, O king, in my judgment, an Atiratha. Afflicting all foes in
battle, he will singly sweep the field, like Pinaka,--bearing God himself
in rage on the occasion of the universal dissolution. Even great warriors
will speak of his car-divisions, so multitudinous are they, as resembling
the very ocean or that of the gods, in battle! Kshattradharman, the son
of Dhrishtadyumna, owing to his immature years, as also in consequence of
his want of exercise in arms, is, in my judgment, O king, only half a
Ratha. That relative of the Pandavas, the mighty bowman Dhrishtaketu, the
heroic son of Sisupala, the king of the Chedis, is a Maharatha. That
brave ruler of the Chedis will, O king, with his son, achieve feats such
as are difficult for even a Maharatha. Kshattradeva, that subjugator of
hostile cities, who is devoted to Kshatriya virtues, is, O great king, in
my judgment, one of the best Rathas among the Pandavas. Those brave
warriors among the Panchalas, viz., Jayanta and Amitaujas and the great
car-warrior Satyajit are all, O king, high-souled Maharathas. They will
all, O sire, fight in battle like furious elephants. Aja and Bhoja, both
endued with great prowess, are both Maharathas. Possessed of great might,
those two heroes will fight for the Pandavas. Both of them are endued
with great lightness of hand in the use of weapons. Both of them are
conversant with all the modes of warfare, both are well-skilled and
possessed of firm prowess. The five Kshatriya brothers, O king, who are
difficult of being vanquished, and all of whom have blood red banners,
are foremost of the Rathas. Kasika, and Sukumara, and Nila, and that
other one, viz., Suryadatta, and Sankha, otherwise called Madiraswa, are
all in my judgment, the foremost of Rathas. Possessed of every
qualification that renders them fit for battle, they are acquainted with
all weapons, and all of them are endued with high souls. Vardhakshemi, O
king, is in my judgment, a Maharatha. King Chitrayudha is, in my
judgment, one of the best of Rathas. He is, besides, an asset in battle
and devotedly attached to the diadem-decked (Arjuna). Those mighty
car-warriors, those tigers among men, Chekitana, and Satyadhriti, are two
of the best Rathas of the Pandavas in my judgment. Vyaghradatta, O
monarch, and Chandrasena also, O Bharata, are without doubt two of the
best Rathas, as I think, of the Pandavas. Senavindu, O king, otherwise
called Krodhahantri by name, who, O lord, is regarded as equal of
Vasudeva and of Bhimasena, will contend with great prowess in battle
against your warriors. Indeed, that best of kings, ever boasting of his
feats in battle, should be regarded by thee, precisely as myself, Drona
and Kripa are regarded by thee! That best of men, worthy of praise, viz.,
Kasya, is endued with great lightness of hand in the use of weapons.
Indeed, that subjugator of hostile cities is known to me as equal to one
Ratha. Drupada's son, Satyajit, young in years and displaying great
prowess in battle, should be regarded as equal to eight Rathas. Indeed
being Dhrishtadyumna's equal, he is an Atiratha. Desirous of spreading
the fame of the Pandavas, he will achieve great feats. Devoted to the
Pandavas and endued with great bravery, there is another great Ratha of
the Pandavas, viz., king Pandya, that bowman of mighty energy. The mighty
bowman Dhridadhanwan is another Maharatha of the Pandavas. O subjugator
of hostile cities, that foremost of Kurus, viz., Srenimat and king
Vasudeva are both, in my judgment, Atirathas.'"
