SECTION CLXIX
"Bhishma said, 'Both the brothers Achala and Vrisha are Rathas.
Invincible (in battle) they will slay thy foes. Endued with great
strength, those tigers among men, those foremost of Gandharvas, are firm
in wrath. Young and handsome, they are possessed of great strength. As
regards this thy ever dear friend, this one who is always boastful of his
skill in battle, this one who always urgeth thee, O king, to fight with
the Pandavas, this vile braggart, Karna, the son of Surya, this one who
is thy counsellor, guide, and friend, this vain wight who is destitute of
sense, this Karna, is neither a Ratha nor an Atiratha. Without sense,
this one hath been deprived of his natural coat of mail. Always kind, he
hath also been deprived of his celestial ear-rings. In consequence of the
curse of Rama (his preceptor in arms) as also of the words of a Brahmana
(who cursed him on another occasion), owing also to his deprivation of
the accoutrements of battle, he, in my judgment, is only half a Ratha.
Having approached Falguni (in battle), he will not certainly escape with
life!' Hearing this, Drona, that foremost of all wielders of weapons,
said, 'It is even so as thou hast said. That is not untrue! He boasteth
on the eve of every battle, but yet he is seen to retreat from every
engagement. Kind (out of season) and blundering, it is for this that
Karna, in my judgment, is only half a Ratha!'
"Hearing these words, Radha's son, expanding his eyes in rage, and
afflicting Bhishma with words like sharp hooks, said unto Ganga's son
these words, 'O grandsire, though I am innocent yet from thy aversion to
me, thou manglest me thus, according to thy pleasure, with thy wordy
arrows at every step. I tolerate, however, all this for the sake of
Duryodhana. Indicating me as only half a Ratha, thou regardest me
worthless, as if, indeed, I were a coward! What doubt is there in this? I
do not speak an untruth when I say that thou, O Ganga's son, art an enemy
of the whole universe, and especially of all the Kurus! The king,
however, doth not know this! Who else is there that would thus seek to
disunite and abate the energy of these kings that are all equal and that
are all equally brave, as thou, from thy hatred of merit, seekest to do?
O Kaurava, neither years, nor wrinkles, nor wealth, nor possession of
friends, would entitle a Kshatriya to be regarded as a Maharatha! It hath
been said that a Kshatriya acquireth eminence only through might, as
Brahmanas acquire eminence through superiority in mantras, as Vaisyas
through wealth, and Sudras through age. Influenced, however, by lust and
envy, and acting from ignorance, thou hast indicated Rathas and Atirathas
according only to thy own caprice! Blessed be thou, O mighty-armed
Duryodhana, judge properly! Let this wicked Bhishma, who only wrongeth
thee, be abandoned by thee! Thy warriors, once disunited, can with
difficulty be united again. O tiger among men, thy main army, under such
circumstances, can with difficulty be united; far greater will the
difficulty be in uniting an army gathered from various provinces! Behold,
O Bharata, doubt (of success) hath already arisen in the hearts of thy
warriors! This Bhishma weakeneth our energy in our very presence! Where
is the task of ascertaining the merits of Rathas, and where is Bhishma of
little understanding? I alone will withstand the army of Pandavas. Coming
in contact with me, whose arrows never go for nothing, the Pandavas and
the Panchalas will fly away in all directions like oxen when they come in
contact with a tiger! Where, Oh, are battle, the press of armed
encounter, good counsels and well-expressed words, and where is Bhishma,
who is superannuated and of wicked soul, and who is impelled by the very
fates to become their victim? Alone he challengeth the whole universe! Of
false vision he regardeth none else as a man. It is true the scriptures
teach that the words of the old should be listened to. That, however,
doth not refer to those that are very old, for these, in my judgment,
become children again. Alone I will exterminate the army of the Pandavas!
The fame, however, of such a feat will attach to Bhishma, O tiger among
kings, for this Bhishma, O monarch, hath been made by thee the commander
of thy forces, and the renown always attacheth to the leader and not to
those that fight under him. I will not, therefore, O king, fight as long
as Ganga's son liveth! After Bhishma, however, hath been laid low, I will
fight with all the Maharathas of the enemy united together!'
"Bhishma said, 'This burden, vast as the ocean, in the matter of
Duryodhana's battle (with the Pandavas), is about to be taken up by me. I
have thought of it for many years. Now that the hour is come for that
terrible encounter, dissensions amongst ourselves should not be created
by me. It is for this, Suta's son, that thou livest! Else, superannuated
though I am and young in years thou art, I would quell thy desire for
battle and crush thy hope of life! (Thy preceptor) Rama, the son of
Jamadagni, shooting his great weapons, could not cause me the slightest
pain. What canst thou, therefore, do to me? They that are good, do not
approve self-praise. Infamous wretch of thy race, know that I indulge in
little boast because I am enraged. Vanquishing on a single car all the
assembled Kshatriyas of the world at the Swayamvara of the daughters of
the ruler of Kasi, I abducted those maidens. Alone, I stopped on the
field of battle the rush of countless kings with their soldiers!
Obtaining thee as embodiment of strife, a great calamity is ready to
overtake the Kurus! Strive then for slaying our antagonists. Be a man,
fight with that Partha, whom thou so often challengest. O thou of wicked
understanding, I desire to see thee come out of that encounter with thy
life!'
"King Duryodhana then said unto Bhishma, of great prowess, 'Cast thy eyes
on me, O Ganga's son! Great is the business that is at hand! Think
earnestly as how I may be most benefited! Both of you will render me
great services! I desire now to bear of the best car-warriors among the
enemy, that is, of those that are Atirathas among them and of those that
are leaders of car-division. O Kaurava, I desire to hear of the strength
and weakness of my foes, since when this night will dawn, our great
battle will take place.'"
