SECTION CLXVIII
"Bhishma said, 'This thy maternal uncle Sakuni is, O king, equal to a
single Ratha. Having caused the (present) hostilities (to break out) with
the sons of Pandu, he will fight. There is no doubt in this. His troops
are irresistible when rushing to battle. Armed with various kinds of
weapons in abundance, in speed, they are equal to the very wind. The
mighty bowman (Aswatthaman) who is Drona's son surpasseth all bowmen.
Acquainted with all modes of warfare, and of unbaffled weapons, he is a
Maharatha. Like the wielder of Gandiva, the shafts of this warrior, shot
from his bow, proceed in a continuous line, touching one another. If he
wishes it, this Maharatha is capable of consuming the three worlds.
Engaged in austerities in his hermitage, he hath, by these, increased
both his fury and energy. Possessed of great intelligence, he hath been
favoured by Drona with (the gift of all) celestial weapons. There is,
however, O bull of Bharata's race, one great defect in him, in
consequence of which, O best of kings, I do not regard him either as a
Ratha or a Maharatha. This regenerate man is exceedingly fond of living,
life being very dear to him. Amongst the warriors of both armies there is
no one who can be regarded as his peer. On even a single car he can
annihilate the very army of the celestials. Possessed of a strong frame,
he can split the very mountains by the flaps of his bow-string, striking
against the leathern fence on his left arm. Endued with innumerable
qualities, this smiter of fierce effulgence will wander (over the field
of battle), incapable of being withstood like Yama himself, mace in hand.
Resembling the fire at the end of the Yuga as regards his fury, possessed
of leonine neck, and endued with great lustre, Aswatthaman will
extinguish the embers of this battle between the Bharata's. His father
(Drona) is endued with great energy, and though aged, is still superior
to many young men. He will achieve great feats in battle. I have no doubt
of this. Staying immovably (on the field), he will consume Yudhishthira's
troops. The Pandava army will play the part of the dry grass and fuel in
which that fire will originate, while the impetus of his own weapons will
be the wind for fanning it into a (mighty) flame. This bull among men, is
a leader of bands of car-warriors. The son of Bharadwaja will achieve
fierce feats for thy good! The preceptor of all Kshatriyas of royal
lineage, the venerable preceptor, will exterminate the Srinjayas.
Dhananjaya, however, is dear to him. This mighty bowman, therefore,
remembering his own celebrated and highly meritorious services as
preceptor, will never be able to slay Partha who is capable of achieving
great feats without any trouble. O hero, Drona always boasteth of the
numerous accomplishments of Partha. Indeed, Bharadwaja looketh on him
with greater affection than on his own son. Endued with great prowess, he
can, on a single car, beat in battle, by means of his celestial weapons,
all the gods, Gandharvas, and human beings united together. That tiger
among kings, is, O monarch, one of thy Maharathas. Capable of breaking
the car-ranks of hostile heroes, he, in my judgment, is one of thy
foremost of car-warriors. Afflicting the ranks of the enemy at the head
of his own large force, he will consume the Panchalas like fire consuming
a heap of dry grass. Possessed of true fame, prince Vrihadvala is equal
to single Ratha. He, O monarch, will roam amid thy enemy's troops like
Death himself. His troops, O king of kings, accoutred in various kinds of
mail and armed with diverse kinds of weapons, will wander on the field,
slaying all the warriors opposed to them. Vrishasena, the son of Karna,
is one of thy foremost of car-warriors and is a Maharatha. That foremost
of mighty men will consume the troops of thy enemy. Endued with great
energy, Jalasandha, O king, is one of thy foremost of Rathas. Born in
Madhu's race, that slayer of hostile heroes, is prepared to cast away his
very life in battle. Skilled in battle, that mighty-armed warrior,
scattering the enemy's ranks before him, will fight in battle mounted on
car or from the elephant's back. That best of kings, O monarch, is in my
judgment, a Ratha. He will, in fierce battle, cast away for thy sake his
very life with all, his troops possessed of great prowess and acquainted
with all the modes of warfare, he will, O king, fight fearlessly with thy
foes in battle. Never retreating from battle, brave, and resembling Yama
himself, Vahlika, O king, is in my judgment, an Atiratha. Rushing to the
encounter he never cometh back. Indeed, he will slay hostile warriors in
battle like the Wind-god himself. That router of hostile car-ranks, that
car-warrior of wonderful feats in battle, commander of thy forces,
Satyavan is, O king, a Maharatha. He never cherisheth grief at the
prospect of battle. Confounding those warriors that stand in the way of
his car, he falleth upon them. Always displaying his prowess against the
enemy, that best of men will, for thy sake, in fierce press of battle,
achieve all that a good Kshatriya should. Thai chief of Rakshasas,
Alambhusha, of cruel deeds, is a Maharatha. Remembering his old
hostilities (with the Pandavas), he will commit great execution among the
foe. He is the best of Rathas amongst all the Rakshasa-warriors.
Possessing powers of illusion, and firm in enmity, he will wander
fiercely on the field. The ruler of Pragjyotisha, the brave Bhagadatta of
exceeding prowess, is the foremost of those holding the elephant hook,
and is skilled also in fighting from a car. An encounter took place
between him and the wielder of Gandiva for days together, O king, each
desirous of victory over the other. Then Bhagadatta, O son of Gandhari,
who regarded Indra as his friend, made friendship with (Indra's son) the
high-souled Pandava. Skilled in fight from the elephant's neck, this king
will fight in battle, like Vasava among the celestials, fighting from his
Airavata.'"
