
SECTION LXXXVII
"Vaisampayana said, 'While that king of kings dwelt in heaven--the home
of the celestials, he was reverenced by the gods, the Sadhyas, the
Maruts, and the Vasus. Of sacred deeds, and mind under complete control,
the monarch used to repair now and then from the abode of the celestials
unto the region of Brahman. And it hath been heard by me that he dwelt
for a long time in heaven.
"One day that best of kings, Yayati, went to Indra and there in course of
conversation the lord of Earth was asked by Indra as follows:
'What didst thou say, O king, when thy son Puru took thy decrepitude on
Earth and when thou gavest him thy kingdom?'
"Yayati answered, 'I told him that the whole country between the rivers
Ganga and Yamuna was his. That is, indeed, the central region of the
Earth, while the out-lying regions are to be the dominions of thy
brothers. I also told him that those without anger were ever superior to
those under its sway, those disposed to forgive were ever superior to the
unforgiving. Man is superior to the lower animals. Among men again the
learned are superior to the un-learned. If wronged, thou shouldst not
wrong in return. One's wrath, if disregarded, burneth one's own self; but
he that regardeth it not taketh away all the virtues of him that
exhibiteh it. Never shouldst thou pain others by cruel speeches. Never
subdue thy foes by despicable means; and never utter such scorching and
sinful words as may torture others. He that pricketh as if with thorns
men by means of hard and cruel words, thou must know, ever carrieth in
his mouth the Rakshasas. Prosperity and luck fly away at his very sight.
Thou shouldst ever keep the virtuous before thee as thy models; thou
shouldst ever with retrospective eye compare thy acts with those of the
virtuous; thou shouldst ever disregard the hard words of the wicked. Thou
shouldst ever make the conduct of the wise the model upon which thou art
to act thyself. The man hurt by the arrows of cruel speech hurled from
one's lips, weepeth day and night. Indeed, these strike at the core of
the body. Therefore the wise never fling these arrows at others. There is
nothing in the three worlds by which thou canst worship and adore the
deities better than by kindness, friendship, charity and sweet speeches
unto all. Therefore, shouldst thou always utter words that soothe, and
not those that scorch. And thou shouldst regard those that deserve, thy
regards, and shouldst always give but never beg!"'
