SECTION CLXXXVI
"Bhishma said, 'Then, O great king, during the night, having bowed unto
the Brahmanas, the Rishis, the gods, and all those creatures that wander
during the dark, and also all the kings of the earth, I laid myself down
on my bed, and in the solitude of my room, I began to reflect in the
following way.--For many days hath this fierce combat of terrible
consequence lasted between myself and Jamadagni. I am unable, however, to
vanquish on the field of battle that Rama of mighty energy. If indeed, I
am competent to vanquish in battle that Brahmana of mighty strength,
viz., Jamadagni's son of great prowess, then let the gods kindly show
themselves to me this night!--Mangled with arrows as I lay asleep, O
great king, that night on my right side, towards the morning, those
foremost of Brahmanas who had raised me when I had fallen down from my
car and held me up and said unto me--Do not fear--and who had comforted
me, showed themselves to me, O king, in a dream! And they stood
surrounding me and said these words. Listen to them as I repeat them to
thee, O perpetuator of Kuru's race! Rise, O Ganga's son, thou needst have
no fear! We will protect thee, for thou art our own body! Rama, the son
of Jamadagni, will never be able to vanquish thee in battle! Thou, O bull
of Bharata's race, wilt be the conqueror of Rama in combat! This beloved
weapon, O Bharata, called Praswapa, appertaining to the lord of all
creatures, and forged by the divine artificer, will come to thy
knowledge, for it was known to thee in thy former life! Neither Rama, nor
any person on earth is acquainted with it. Recollect it, therefore, O
thou of mighty arms, and apply it with strength! O king of kings, O
sinless one, it will come to thee of itself! With it, O Kaurava, thou
wilt be able to check all persons endued with mighty energy! O king, Rama
will not be slain outright by it, thou shalt not, therefore, O giver of
honours, incur any sin by using it! Afflicted by the force of this thy
weapon, the son of Jamadagni, will fall asleep! Vanquishing him thus,
thou wilt again awaken him in battle, O Bhishma, with that dear weapon
called Samvodhana! Do what we have told thee, O Kauravya, in the morning,
stationed on thy car. Asleep or dead we reckon it as the same, O king,
Rama will not surely die! Apply, therefore, this Praswapa weapon so
happily thought of!--Having said this, O king, those foremost of
Brahmanas, eight in number and resembling one another in form, and
possessed of effulgent bodies, all vanished from my sight!'"
