SECTION CLXXIX
"Akritavrana said, 'Of these two afflictions of thine, for which, O
blessed lady, dost thou seek a remedy? Tell me this. Is it thy wish that
the lord of Saubha should be urged to wed thee, the high-souled Rama will
certainly urge him from desire of doing thee good? Or, if thou wishest to
behold Ganga's son, Bhishma, defeated in battle by intelligent Rama
Bhargava will gratify even that wish of thine. Hearing what Srinjaya has
to say, and what thou also, O thou of sweet smiles, may have to say, let
that be settled this very day what should be done for thee.' Hearing
these words, Amva said, 'O holy one, abducted I was by Bhishma acting
from ignorance, for, O regenerate one, Bhishma knew not that my heart had
been given away to Salwa. Thinking of this in thy mind, let that be
resolved upon by thee which is consistent with justice, and let steps be
taken for accomplishing that resolution. Do that, O Brahmana, which is
proper to be done towards either that tiger among the Kurus, viz.,
Bhishma, singly, or towards the ruler of the Salwas, or towards both of
them! I have told thee truly about the root of my grief. It behoveth
thee, O holy one, to do that which is consistent with reason.'
"Akritavrana said, 'This, O blessed lady, O thou of the fairest
complexion, that thou sayest with eyes fixed upon virtue, is, indeed,
worthy of thee. Listen, however, to what I say! If Ganga's son had never
taken thee to the city called after the elephant, then, O timid girl,
Salwa would have, at Rama's behest, taken thee on his head! It is because
Bhishma bore thee away by force that king Salwa's suspicions have been
awakened in respect of thee, O thou of slender-waist! Bhishma is proud of
his manliness and is crowned with success. Therefore, thou shouldst cause
thy vengeance to fall upon Bhishma (and no other)!' Hearing these words
of the sage, Amva said, 'O regenerate one, this desire hath been
cherished by me also in my heart, viz., that, if possible. Bhishma should
be caused by me to be slain in battle! O thou of mighty arms, be it
Bhishma or be it king Salwa, punish that man whom thou thinkest to be
guilty and through whose act I have been so miserable!'
"Bhishma continued, 'In conversation such as this, that day passed and
the night also, O best of Bharata's race, with its delicious breeze which
was neither cold nor hot. Then Rama appeared there, beaming with energy.
And that sage wearing matted-locks on his bead and attired in deer-skins
was surrounded by his disciples. And endued with magnanimous soul, he had
his bow in hand. And bearing also a sword and a battle-axe, that sinless
one, O tiger among kings, approached the Srinjaya king (Hotravahana) in
that forest. And the ascetics dwelling there and that king also who was
endued with great ascetic merit, beholding him, all stood up and waited,
O king, with joined hands. And that helpless maiden too did the same. And
they all cheerfully worshipped Bhargava with the offer of honey and
curds. Being worshipped duly by them, Rama sat with them seated round
him. Then, O Bharata, Jamadagni's son and Hotravahana, seated thus
together, began to discourse. And after their discourse was over, the
sage Hotravahana opportunately said in a sweet voice these words of grave
import unto that foremost one of Bhrigu's race, viz., Rama of mighty
strength, 'O Rama, this is my daughter's daughter, O lord, being the
daughter of the king of Kasi.
She hath something to be done for her! Oh, listen to it duly, O thou that
art skilled in all tasks!' Hearing these words of his friend, Rama
addressed that maiden saying. 'Tell me what thou hast to say.' At these
words, Amva approached Rama who resembled a blazing fire, and worshipping
both his feet with her bent head, touched them with her two hands that
resembled, in radiance, a couple of lotuses and stood silently before
him. And filled with grief, she wept aloud, her eyes bathed in tears. And
she then sought the protection of that descendant of Bhrigu, who was the
refuge of all distressed persons. And Rama said, 'Tell me what grief is
in thy heart. I will act according to thy words!' Thus encouraged, Amva
said, 'O thou of great vows, O holy one, today I seek thy protection! O
lord, raise me from this unfathomable ocean of sorrow.'
"Bhishma continued, 'Beholding her beauty and her youthful body and its
great delicacy, Rama began to think,--What will she say? And that
perpetuator of Bhrigu's line, thinking inwardly of this, sat long in
silence, filled with pity. He then addressed that maiden of sweet smiles
again, saying, 'Tell us what thou hast to say!' Thus encouraged, she
represented everything truly unto Bhargava. And Jamadagni's son, hearing
these words of the princess, and having first settled what he should do,
addressed that damsel of the fairest complexion, saying, 'O beautiful
lady, I will send word unto Bhishma, that foremost one of Kuru's race.
Having beard what my behest is, that king will certainly obey it. If,
however, the son of Jahnavi do not act according to my words, I will then
consume him in battle, O blessed girl, with all his counsellors! Or, O
princess, if thou desirest it, I may even address the heroic ruler of the
Salwas to the matter in hand.' Hearing these words of Rama, Amva said,
'Dismissed I was by Bhishma, O son of Bhrigu's race, as soon as he heard
that my heart had previously been freely given away to the ruler of the
Salwas. Approaching then the lord of Saubha, I addressed him in language
that was unbecoming. Doubtful of the purity of my conduct, he refused to
accept me. Reflecting on all this, with the aid of thy own understanding,
it behoveth thee, O son of Bhrigu's race, to do that which should be done
in view of these circumstances. Bhishma, however, of great vows is the
root of my calamity, for he brought me under his power taking me up (on
his car) by violence! Slay that Bhishma, O thou of mighty arms, for whose
sake, O tiger of Bhrigu's race, overwhelmed with such distress, I suffer
such poignant misery! Bhishma, O thou of Bhrigu's race, is covetous, and
mean, and proud of his victory. Therefore, O sinless one, thou shouldst
give him his deserts. While, of lord, I was being abducted by him, even
this was the desire that I cherished in my heart, viz., that I should
cause that hero of great vows to be slain. Therefore, O sinless Rama,
gratify this desire of mine! O thou of mighty arms, slay Bhishma, even as
Purandara slew Vritra.'"
