SECTION CLXXXV
"Bhishma said, 'Next morning, O king, when the sun rose brightly, the
combat between myself and him of Bhrigu's race, again, commenced. Then
Rama, that foremost of smiters, stationed on his quickly-moving car,
rained on me a thick downpour of arrows like the clouds on the
mountain-breast. My beloved charioteer then, afflicted by that arrowy
shower, swerved from his place in the car, filling me with grief on his
account. A total unconsciousness then came over him. And thus wounded by
that arrowy downpour he fell down upon the earth in a swoon. And
afflicted as he had been by Rama's shafts, he soon gave up his life.
Then, O great king, fear entered my heart. And when, on the death of my
charioteer, I was still lamenting for him with heart unhinged by sorrow,
Rama began to shoot at me many death-dealing shafts. Indeed, even when
endangered at the death of my charioteer I was lamenting for him, he of
Bhrigu's race, drawing the bow with strength, pierced me deep with an
arrow! O king, that blood-drinking shaft, falling upon my breast, pierced
me through and fell simultaneously with my person upon the earth! Then, O
bull of Bharata's race, thinking I was dead, Rama repeatedly roared aloud
like the clouds and rejoiced exceedingly! indeed, O king, when thus I
fell down on the earth, Rama, filled with joy, sent forth loud shouts
along with his followers, while all the Kauravas who stood beside me and
all those who came there to witness the combat were afflicted with great
woe on seeing me fall. While lying prostrate, O lion among kings, I
beheld eight Brahmanas endued with the effulgence of the sun or the fire.
They stood surrounding me on that field of battle and supporting me on
their arms. Indeed, borne up by those Brahmanas I had not to touch the
ground. Like friends they supported me in mid-air while I was breathing
heavily. And they were sprinkling me with drops of water. And bearing me
up as they stood, they then, O king, repeatedly said unto me, 'Do not
fear! Let prosperity be thine!' Comforted then by those words of theirs,
I quickly rose up. I then beheld my mother Ganga--that foremost of the
rivers, stationed on my car. Indeed, O king of the Kurus, it was that
great river-goddess who had controlled my steeds in the combat (after my
charioteer's fall)! Worshipping then the feet of my mother and of the
spirits of my ancestors, I ascended my car. My mother then protected my
car, steeds, and all the implements of battle. With joined bands I
entreated her to go away. Having dismissed her, I myself restrained those
steeds endued with the speed of the wind, and fought with Jamadagni's
son, O Bharata, till the close of the day! Then, O chief of the Bharatas,
in course of that combat, I shot at Rama a powerful and heart-piercing
arrow endued with great speed. Afflicted with that shaft, Rama then, his
bow loosened from his grasp, fell down upon the earth on his knees, reft
of consciousness! And when Rama, that giver of many thousands (of golden
coins) fell, masses of clouds covered the firmament, pouring a copious
shower of blood! And meteors by hundreds fell, and thunder-rolls were
heard, causing everything to tremble! And suddenly Rahu enveloped the
blazing sun, and rough winds began to blow! And the earth itself began to
tremble. And vultures and crows and cranes began to alight in joy! And
the points of the horizon seemed to be ablaze and jackals began
repeatedly to yell fiercely! And drums, unstruck (by human hands), began
to produce harsh sound! Indeed, when the high-souled Rama embraced the
earth, reft of consciousness, all these frightful and alarming omens of
evil were seen! Then all on a sudden rising up, Rama approached me once
more, O Kaurava, for battle, forgetting everything and deprived of his
senses by anger. And that mighty-armed one took up his bow endued with
great strength and also a deadly arrow. I, however, resisted him
successfully. The great Rishis then (that stood there) were filled with
pity at the sight, while he, however, of Bhrigu's race, was filled with
great wrath. I then took up a shaft, resembling the blazing fire that
appears at the end of the Yuga, but Rama of immeasurable soul baffled
that weapon of mine. Then covered by clouds of dust, the splendour of the
solar disc was dimmed, and the sun went to the western mount. And night
came with its delicious and cool breezes, and then both of us desisted
from the fight. In this way, O king, when evening came the fierce battle
ceased, and (next day) with the re-appearance of the sun it commenced
again. And it lasted for three and twenty days together.'"
