SECTION CLXXXVIII
"Bhishma said, 'When I had formed this resolution, O king, a din of
tumultuous voices arose in the sky. And it said,--O son of Kuru's race,
do not let off the Praswapa weapon!--Notwithstanding this, I still aimed
that weapon at Bhrigu's descendant. When I had aimed it, Narada addressed
me, saying, 'Yonder, O Kauravya, stay the gods in the sky! Even they are
forbidding thee today! Do not aim the Praswapa weapon! Rama is an ascetic
possessed of Brahma merit, and he is, again, thy preceptor! Never,
Kauravya, humiliate him.' While Narada was telling me this, I beheld
those eight utterers of Brahma stationed in the sky. Smilingly, O king,
they said unto me slowly,--O chief of the Bharatas, do even what Narada
sayeth. Even that, O best of Bharata's race, is highly beneficial to the
world!' I then withdrew that great weapon called Praswapa and invoked
according to the ordinance the weapon called Brahma in the combat.
Beholding the Praswapa weapon withdrawn, O lion among kings, Rama was in
great huff, and suddenly exclaimed, 'Wretch that I am, I am vanquished, O
Bhishma!' Then Jamadagni's son behold before him his venerable father and
his father's fathers. They stood surrounding him there, and addressed him
in these words of consolation, 'O sire, never display such 'rashness
again, the rashness, viz., of engaging in battle with Bhishma, or
especially with any Kshatriya, O descendant of Bhrigu's race, to fight is
the duty of a Kshatriya! Study (of the Vedas) and practice of vows are
the highest wealth of Brahmanas! For some reason, before 'this, thou
hadst been ordered by us to take up weapons. Thou hadst then perpetrated
that terrible and unbecoming feat. Let this battle with Bhishma be thy
very last, for enough of it thou hadst already. O thou of mighty arms,
leave the combat. Blessed be thou, let this be the very last instance of
thy taking up the bow! O invincible one, throw thy bow aside, and
practice ascetic austerities, O thou of Bhrigu's race! Behold, Bhishma,
the son of Santanu, is forbidden by all the gods! They are endeavouring
to pacify him, repeatedly saying,--Desist from this battle! Do not light
with Rama who is thy preceptor. It is not proper for thee, O perpetuator
of Kuru's race, to vanquish Rama in battle! O son of Ganga, show this
Brahmana every honour on the field of battle! As regards thee, we are thy
superiors and therefore forbid thee! Bhishma is one of the foremost of
Vasus! O son, it is fortunate, that thou art still alive! Santanu's son
by Ganga--a celebrated Vasu as he is,--how can he be defeated by thee?
Desist, therefore, O Bhargava! That foremost of the Pandavas, Arjuna, the
mighty son of Indra, hath been ordained by the Self-create to be the
slayer of Bhishma!'
"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by his own ancestors, Rama answered
them, saying, 'I cannot give up the combat. Even this is the solemn vow I
have made. Before this, I never left the field, giving up battle! Ye
grandsires, if you please, cause Ganga's son to desist from the fight! As
regards myself, I can, by no means, desist from the combat!' Hearing
these words of his, O king, those ascetics with Richika at their head,
coming to me with Narada in their company, told me, 'O sire, desist from
battle! Honour that foremost of Brahmanas!' For the sake of Kshatriya
morality, I replied unto them, saying. Even this is the vow I have taken
in this world, viz., that I would never desist from battle turning my
back, or suffer my back to be wounded with arrows! I cannot, from
temptation or distress, or fear, or for the sake of wealth, abandon my
eternal duty! Even this is my fixed resolution! Then all those ascetics
with Narada at their head, O king, and my mother Bhagirathi, occupied the
field of battle (before me). I, however, stayed quietly with arrows and
bow as before, resolved to fight. They then once more turned towards Rama
and addressed him, saying. 'The hearts of Brahmanas are made of butter.
Be pacified, therefore, O son of Bhrigu's race! O Rama, O Rama, desist
from this battle, O best of Brahmanas! Bhishma is incapable of being
slain by thee, as indeed, thou, O Bhargava, art incapable of being slain
by him!' Saying these words while they stood obstructing the field, the
Pitris caused that descendant of Bhrigu's race to place aside his
weapons. Just at this time I once more beheld those eight utterers of
Brahma, blazing with effulgence and resembling bright stars risen on the
firmament. Stationed for battle as I was, they said these words unto me
with great affection, 'O thou of mighty arms, go unto Rama who is thy
preceptor! Do what is beneficial to all the worlds. Beholding then that
Rama had desisted owing to the words of his well-wishers, I also, for the
good of the worlds, accepted the words of my well-wishers. Though mangled
exceedingly, I still approached Rama and worshipped him. The great
ascetic Rama then, smilingly, and with great affection, said unto me,
'There is no Kshatriya equal to thee on the earth! Go now, O Bhishma, for
in this combat thou hast pleased me highly'! Summoning then in my
presence that maiden (the daughter of Kasi), Bhargava sorrowfully said
unto her these words in the midst of all those high-souled persons.'"
