SECTION CXCIV
"Bhishma said. 'Then, O mighty-armed king, Sikhandin's mother represented
unto her lord the truth about her daughter, Sikhandin. And she said,
'Childless, O great king, as I was, from fear of my co-wives, when
Sikhandini, my daughter, was born, I represented unto you that it was a
son! For thy love of me, thou also hadst corroborated it, and, O bull
among kings, thou hadst performed all the rites prescribed for a son in
respect of this daughter of mine! Thou then didst marry her, O king, to
the daughter of the king of the Dasarnakas. I also approved of this act,
remembering the words of the (great) god! Indeed, I did not prevent it,
remembering the words of Siva,--Born a daughter, she will become a son!'
Hearing all this, Drupada, otherwise called Yajnasena, informed all his
counsellors of these facts. And, O monarch, the king then took counsel
with ministers for the proper protection of his subjects (from the
would-be invader). Although he had himself deceived the king of the
Dasarnakas, yet giving it out that the alliance he had made was proper,
he began to settle his plans with undivided attention. King Drupada's
city was, O Bharata, naturally well-protected. Yet at the advent of
danger, O monarch, they began to protect it all the more carefully and
fortify it (with defensive works). The king, however, with his queen, was
greatly afflicted, thinking of how a war might not take place with his
brother. Reflecting on this, he began to pay his adorations to the gods.
His respected wife, beholding him relying on the god and paying his
adorations to them, than addressed him, O king, and said, 'Homage to the
gods is productive of benefits! It is, therefore, approved by the
righteous. What shall I say, again, of those that are sunk in an ocean of
distress? Therefore, pay homage to those that are thy superiors and let
all the gods also be worshipped, making large presents the while (unto
the Brahmanas)! Let oblations be poured on the fire for pacifying the
ruler of the Dasarnakas. O lord, think of the means by which, without a
war, thou mayst be able to pacify thy brother! Through the grace of the
gods all this will happen. For the preservation of this city, O thou of
large eyes, thou hast taken counsel with thy ministers. Do all, O king,
that those counsels seem to indicate, for reliance on the gods, when
supported by human exertion, always, O king, leadeth to success, If these
two do not go hand-in-hand, success becometh unattainable. Therefore,
with all thy advisers, make such arrangements in thy city as are proper,
and pay homage, O monarch, as thou pleasest, to the gods.' While husband
and wife were conversing with each other thus, both filled with grief,
their helpless daughter, Sikhandini, was filled with shame. She then
reflected, saying, 'It is for me that these two are plunged into grief!'
Thinking so, she resolved upon putting an end to her own life. Having
formed this determination, she left home, filled with heavy sorrow, and
went into a dense and solitary forest that was the haunt, O king, of a
very formidable Yaksha called Sthunakarna. From fear of that Yaksha men
never went into that forest. And within it stood a mansion with high
walls and a gateway, plastered over with powdered earth, and rich with
smoke bearing the fragrance of fried paddy. Entering that mansion,
Sikhandini, the daughter of Drupada, O king, began to reduce herself by
foregoing all food for many days. Thereupon, the Yaksha named Sthuna, who
was endued with kindness, showed himself unto her. And he enquired of
her, saying, 'For what object is this endeavour of thine? I will
accomplish it, tell me without delay!' Thus asked, the maiden answered
him, repeatedly saying, 'Thou art unable to accomplish it!' The Guhyaka,
however, rejoined, without a moment's delay, saying, 'Accomplish it I
will! I am a follower of the Lord of treasures, I can, O princess, grant
boons! I will grant thee even that which cannot be given! Tell me what
thou hast to say!' Thus assured, Sikhandini represented in detail
everything that had happened, unto that chief of Yakshas called
Sthunakarna. And she said, 'My father, O Yaksha, will soon meet with
destruction. The ruler of the Dasarnakas marcheth against him in rage.
That king eased in golden mail is endued with great might and great
courage. Therefore, O Yaksha, save me, my mother, and my father! Indeed,
thou hast already pledged thyself to relieve my distress! Through thy
grace, O Yaksha, I would become a perfect man! As long as that king may
not depart from my city, so long, O great Yaksha, show me grace, O
Guhyaka!'"
