
SECTION VIII
"Sauti said, 'O Brahmana, Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, begot a son in the
womb of his wife Sukanya. And that son was the illustrious Pramati of
resplendent energy. And Pramati begot in the womb of Ghritachi a son
called Ruru. And Ruru begot on his wife Pramadvara a son called Sunaka.
And I shall relate to you in detail, O Brahmana, the entire history of
Ruru of abundant energy. O listen to it then in full!
"Formerly there was a great Rishi called Sthulakesa possessed of ascetic
power and learning and kindly disposed towards all creatures. At that
time, O Brahmana sage, Viswavasu, the King of the Gandharvas, it is said,
had intimacy with Menaka, the celestial dancing-girl. And the Apsara,
Menaka, O thou of the Bhrigu race, when her time was come, brought forth
an infant near the hermitage of Sthulakesa. And dropping the newborn
infant on the banks of the river, O Brahmana, Menaka, the Apsara, being
destitute of pity and shame, went away. And the Rishi, Sthulakesa, of
great ascetic power, discovered the infant lying forsaken in a lonely
part of the river-side. And he perceived that it was a female child,
bright as the offspring of an Immortal and blazing, as it were, with
beauty: And the great Brahmana, Sthulakesa, the first of Munis, seeing
that female child, and filled with compassion, took it up and reared it.
And the lovely child grew up in his holy habitation, the noble-minded and
blessed Rishi Sthulakesa performing in due succession all the ceremonies
beginning with that at birth as ordained by the divine law. And because
she surpassed all of her sex in goodness, beauty, and every quality, the
great Rishi called her by the name of Pramadvara. And the pious Ruru
having seen Pramadvara in the hermitage of Sthulakesa became one whose
heart was pierced by the god of love. And Ruru by means of his companions
made his father Pramati, the son of Bhrigu, acquainted with his passion.
And Pramati demanded her of the far-famed Sthulakesa for his son. And her
foster-father betrothed the virgin Pramadvara to Ruru, fixing the
nuptials for the day when the star Varga-Daivata (Purva-phalguni) would
be ascendant.
"Then within a few days of the time fixed for the nuptials, the beautiful
virgin while at play with companions of her own sex, her time having
come, impelled by fate, trod upon a serpent which she did not perceive as
it lay in coil. And the reptile, urged to execute the will of Fate,
violently darted its envenomed fangs into the body of the heedless
maiden. And stung by that serpent, she instantly dropped senseless on the
ground, her colour faded and all the graces of her person went off. And
with dishevelled hair she became a spectacle of woe to her companions and
friends. And she who was so agreeable to behold became on her death what
was too painful to look at. And the girl of slender waist lying on the
ground like one asleep--being overcome with the poison of the snake-once
more became more beautiful than in life. And her foster-father and the
other holy ascetics who were there, all saw her lying motionless upon the
ground with the splendour of a lotus. And then there came many noted
Brahmanas filled with compassion, and they sat around her. And
Swastyatreya, Mahajana, Kushika, Sankhamekhala, Uddalaka, Katha, and
Sweta of great renown, Bharadwaja, Kaunakutsya, Arshtishena, Gautama,
Pramati, and Pramati's son Ruru, and other inhabitants of the forest,
came there. And when they saw that maiden lying dead on the ground
overcome with the poison of the reptile that had bitten her, they all
wept filled with compassion. But Ruru, mortified beyond measure, retired
from the scene.'"
So ends the eighth section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of the
