SECTION XLIII
Sanjaya said,--"Beholding Dhananjaya then to take up once again (his)
arrows and Gandiva, the mighty car-warriors (of the Pandava party)
uttered a tremendous shout. And those heroes, viz., the Pandavas and the
Somakas, and those who followed them, filled with joy, blew their
sea-born conches. And drums, and Pesis, and Karkachas, and cow-horns were
beaten and blown together, and the uproar made was very loud. And then, O
ruler of men, there came the gods, with Gandharvas and the Pitris, and
the hosts of Siddhas and Charanas, from desire of witnessing (the sight).
And Rishis highly blessed came there in a body with him (Indra) of a
hundred sacrifices at their head, for beholding that great slaughter.
Then, O king, beholding the two armies, that looked like two oceans,
ready for the encounter and continuously moving, the heroic king
Yudhishthira, the Just, putting off his coat of mail and casting aside
his excellent weapon and quickly descending from his car, with joined
hands, proceeded on foot, eyeing the grandsire, with restrained speech,
facing the east, towards the direction where the hostile host was
(standing).[309] And seeing him proceed (thus), Dhananjaya, the son of
Kunti, speedily alighting from his car, followed him, accompanied by his
(other) brothers. And the Lord Vasudeva also followed him behind. And the
principal kings too (of his army), filled with anxiety, followed in the
same path.
"Arjuna said, 'What is this act of thine, O king, that abandoning thy
brothers, thou proceedest on foot, face eastwards, to the hostile host?'
"Bhimasena said, 'Where wilt thou go, O king of kings, having cast off
thy coat of mail and weapons, towards the warriors of the foe cased in
mail, and leaving thy brothers, O ruler of earth?'
"Nakula said, 'Thou art my eldest brother, O Bharata, (beholding) thee
proceeding in this way, fear troubleth my bosom. Tell (us), whither wilt
thou go?'
"Sahadeva said, 'When these hostile divisions, terrible and numerous, are
here with whom we are to fight, whither dost thou go, O king, in the
direction of our foes?'
Sanjaya continued, "Though thus addressed by his brothers, O son of
Kuru's race, Yudhishthira of restrained speech said nothing but continued
to proceed. Unto them (then), the high-souled Vasudeva of great wisdom
smilingly said,--His object is known to me. Having paid his respects to
all his superiors (such as) Bhishma, Drona, and Kripa, and Salya also, he
will fight the foe. It is heard in histories of olden times that he who,
having paid his respects according to the ordinance unto his preceptors,
revered in years and his kinsmen, fighteth with those that are his
superiors, is sure to obtain victory in battle. Even that is my
opinion.--When Krishna was saying this, among the ranks of
Dhritarashtra's son, a loud uproar of Alas, and Oh arose, but the other
(army) remained perfectly still. Beholding Yudhishthira, the heroic
warriors of Dhritarashtra's Son conversed with one another saying,--'This
one is an infamous wretch of his race. It is plain that this king is
coming in terror towards Bhishma's side. Yudhishthira, with his brothers,
hath become a seeker after (Bhishma's) shelter. When Dhananjaya, however,
is (his) protector, and Pandu's son Vrikodara, and Nakula, and Sahadeva
also, why doth the (eldest) son of Pandu come (hither) in fear? Though
celebrated in the world, this one, however, could never have been born in
the Kshatriya order, since he is weak and his bosom is filled with fear
(at the prospect) of battle.' Then those warriors all praised the
Kauravas. And all of them, becoming rejoiced, with cheerful hearts waved
their garments. And, O monarch, all the warriors there (then) censured
Yudhishthira with all his brothers and along with Kesava too. Then the
Kaurava army, having said Fie to Yudhishthira, soon again, O monarch,
became perfectly still,--What will this king say? What will Bhishma say
in reply? What will Bhima boastful of his powers in battle, (say), and
what Krishna and Arjuna? What, indeed, hath (Yudhishthira) to say?--Great
was the curiosity then, O king, of both the armies in respect of
Yudhishthira. The king (meanwhile), penetrating the hostile array
bristling with arrows and darts, proceeded quickly towards Bhishma,
surrounded by his brothers. Seizing his feet with his two hands, the
royal son of Pandu then said unto Santanu's son Bhishma who was there
ready for battle, (these words).
"Yudhishthira said, 'I salute thee, O invincible one. With thee we will
do battle. Grant (us) thy permission in that matter. Give (us) also (thy)
blessing."
"Bhishma said, 'If, O lord of the earth, thou hadst not, in this battle
come to me thus, I would have, O great king, cursed thee, O Bharata, for
bringing about thy defeat. I am gratified (with thee), O son. Do battle,
and obtain victory, O son of Pandu, What else may be desired by thee,
obtain thou in battle. Solicit also the boon, O son of Pritha, which thou
desirest to have from us. If it happens so, O great king, then defeat
will not be thine. A man is the slave of wealth, but wealth is no one's
slave. This is very true, O king. I have been bound by the Kauravas with
(their) wealth. It is for this, O son of Kuru's race, that like a eunuch
I am uttering these words, viz.,--Bound I am by the Kauravas with wealth.
Battle excepted, what dost thou desire?[310]'
"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou of great wisdom, do thou, desirous of my
welfare, from day to day, consult my interests. Do battle, however for
the sake of the Kauravas. Even this is always my prayer (to thee).'
"Bhishma said, 'O king, O son of Kuru's race, what aid can I render thee
in this? I shall, of course, fight for (thy) foes. Tell me what thou hast
to say.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Therefore, O Sire, I ask thee, I bow to thee, O
grandsire, how shall we, in battle, vanquish thee that art invincible?
Tell me this that is for my benefit, if indeed, thou seest any good in
it."
"Bhishma said, 'I do not, O son of Kunti, see the person who, even if he
were the chief of the celestials himself, can defeat me in battle when I
fight.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'My salutations to thee, O grandsire. Therefore, do I
ask thee (this). Tell us how thy own death may be compassed by foes in
battle.'
"Bhishma said, 'I do not see the person, O sire, who can vanquish me in
battle. The time also of my death is not yet come to me once again."
Sanjaya continued,--"Then, O son of Kuru's race, Yudhishthira, once more
saluting him, accepted Bhishma's words with a bend of his head. And that
mighty-armed one then proceeded towards the car of the preceptor ( Drona)
through the midst of all the soldiers who were eyeing him, accompanied by
his brothers. Then saluting Drona and walking round him, the king spoke
to that invincible warrior words that were for his own benefit.[311]
"Yudhishthira said, 'I ask thee, O invincible one, how I may fight
without incurring sin, and how, with thy permission, O regenerate one, I
may vanquish all my foes?[312]
"Drona said, 'If, having resolved to fight, thou hadst not come to me
(thus), I would have cursed thee. O king, for thy complete overthrow. I
am, however, gratified, O Yudhishthira, and honoured by thee, O sinless
one. I permit thee, fight and obtain victory. I will also fulfil thy
wish. Say what thou hast to say. Under these circumstances, battle
excepted, what dost thou wish? A man is the slave of wealth, but wealth
is not one's slave. This is quite true, O king! Bound I have been with
(their) wealth by the Kauravas! It is for this that like a eunuch I shall
fight for the sake of the Kauravas. It is for this that like a eunuch I
am uttering these words--Battle excepted, what dost thou wish? I shall
fight for the sake of the Kauravas, but will pray for thy victory.'[313]
"Yudhishthira said, 'Pray for my victory, O regenerate one, and counsel
what is for my good. Fight, however, for the Kauravas. This is the boon
solicited by me.'
"Drona said, 'Victory, O king, is certain for thee that hast Hari for thy
counsellor. I (also) grant thee that thou wilt vanquish thy foes in
battle. Thither where righteousness is, thither is Krishna, and thither
where Krishna is, thither is victory. Go, fight, O son of Kunti! Ask me,
what shall I say unto thee?'
"Yudhishthira said, 'I ask thee, O foremost of regenerate ones, listen to
what I have to say. How shall we in battle vanquish thee that art
invincible?'
"Drona said, 'As long as I will fight, so long victory can never be
thine. (Therefore) O king, seek with thy brothers, for my speedy
slaughter.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Alas, for this, O thou of mighty arms, tell (us) the
means of thy death. O preceptor, prostrating myself I ask thee this. (My)
salutations to thee."
"Drona said, 'The foe, O sire, I see not who may slay me while standing
in battle I am engaged in fight, with wrath excited, and scattering (my)
arrowy showers continually. Except when addrest for death O king, having
abandoned my arms and withdrawn (in Yoga meditation) from surrounding
sights, none will be able to slay me. This that I tell thee is true. I
also tell thee truly that I will cast off my arms in battle, having heard
something very disagreeable from some one of credible speech.--'"
Sanjaya continued, "Hearing these words, O king, of the wise son of
Bharadwaja, and honouring the preceptor, (Yudhishthira then) proceeded
towards the son of Saradwat. And saluting Kripa and walking round him, O
king, Yudhishthira, accomplished in speech, said these words unto that
warrior of great valour.
"Yudhishthira said, 'Obtaining thy permission, O preceptor, I will fight
without incurring sin, and permitted by thee, O sinless one, I will
vanquish all (my) foes."
"Kripa said, 'If having resolved on fight, thou hadst not come to me
(thus), I would have cursed thee, O king, for thy complete overthrow. A
man is the slave of wealth, but wealth is no one's slave. This is very
true, O king, and bound I have been with wealth by the Kauravas. I must,
O king, fight for their sake. This is my opinion. I therefore, speak like
a eunuch in asking thee,--Battle excepted, what dost thou desire?'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Alas, I ask thee, therefore., O preceptor, listen to
my words.--Saying this, the king, greatly agitated and deprived of his
sense, stood silent."
Sanjaya continued.--"Understanding, however, what he intended to say,
Gautama (Kripa) replied to him, saying,--I am incapable of being slain, O
king. Fight, and obtain victory. I am gratified with thy coming. Rising
every day [from bed] I will pray for thy victory, O monarch. I say this
to thee truly.--Hearing, O king, these words of Gautama, and paying him
due honours, the king proceeded thither where the ruler of the Madra was.
Saluting Salya and walking round him the king said unto that invincible
warrior those words that were for his own benefit.
'Yudhishthira said,--'Obtaining thy permission, O invincible one, I will
fight without incurring sin, and permitted by thee, O king, I will
vanquish (my) valourous foes.'[314]--
"Salya said, 'If, having resolved on fight, thou hadst not come to me
(thus), I would have, O king, cursed thee for thy overthrow in battle. I
am gratified (with thee) and honoured (by thee). Let it be as thou
wishest. I grant thee permission, fight and obtain victory. Speak, O
hero, for what hast thou any need? What shalt I give thee? Under these
circumstances, O king, battle excepted, what dost thou desire? A man is
the slave of wealth but wealth is no one's slave. This is true, O king.
Bound I have been with wealth by the Kauravas, O nephew, it is for this
that I am speaking to thee like a eunuch,--I will accomplish the desire
thou mayst cherish. Battle excepted, what dost thou wish.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Think, O king, daily of what is for my great good.
Fight, according to thy pleasure, for the sake of the foe. This is the
boon that I solicit.'
"Salya said, 'Under these circumstances, say, O best of kings what aid
shall I render thee? I shall, of course, fight for the sake of (thy)
enemy, for I have been made one of their party by the Kauravas with their
wealth.[315]
"Yudhishthira said, 'Even that is my boon, O Salya, which was solicited
by me during the preparations (for the fight). The energy of the Suta's
son (Karna) should be weakened by thee in battle.'
"Salya said, 'This thy wish, O Yudhishthira, shall be accomplished, O son
of Kunti. Go, fight according to thy pleasure. I shall look after thy
victory."
'Sanjaya continued, "Having obtained the permission of his maternal
uncle, the ruler of the Madra, the son of Kunti, surrounded by his
brothers, came out of that vast army. Vasudeva then went to Radha's son
on the field of battle. And the elder brother of Gada, for the sake of
the Pandavas, then said to Karna,--It hath been heard by me, O Karna,
that from hatred of Bhishma thou wilt not fight. Come to our side, O son
of Radha, and (stay with us) as long as Bhishma is not slain. After
Bhishma is slain, O son of Radha, thou mayst then again engage in battle
on Duryodhana's side, if thou hast no preference for any of the
parties.--'
"Karna said, 'I will not do anything that is disagreeable to
Dhritarashtra's son, O Kesava. Devoted to Duryodhana's good, know that I
have cast off my life (for him).--Hearing these words (of Karna), Krishna
ceased, O Bharata, and reunited himself with the sons of Pandu headed by
Yudhishthira. Then amid all the warriors the eldest son of Pandu, loudly
exclaimed,--He who will choose us, him we shall choose for our
ally!--Casting his eyes then upon them, Yuyutsu said these words, with a
cheerful heart, unto Kunti's son king Yudhishthira the Just,--I will
fight under thee in battle, for the sake of you all, with the sons of
Dhritarashtra, if, O king, thou wilt accept me, sinless one.'
"Yudhishthira said, 'Come, come, all of us will fight with thy foolish
brothers. O Yuyutsu, both Vasudeva and we all say to thee--I accept thee,
O thou of mighty arms, fight for my cause. On thee rests, it seems, the
thread of Dhritarashtra's line as also his funeral cake. O prince, O thou
of great splendour, accept us that accept thee. The wrathful Duryodhana
of wicked understanding will cease to live.'"
Sanjaya continued, 'Yuvutsu then, abandoning the Kurus thy sons, went
over to the army of the Pandavas, with beat of drums and cymbals. Then
king Yudhishthira of mighty arms, filled with joy, again put on his
shining coat of mail of golden effulgence. And those bulls among men then
mounted their respective cars. And they counter-arrayed their troops in
battle-array as before. And they caused drums and cymbals in many
hundreds to be sounded. And those bulls among men also set up diverse
leonine roars.[316] And beholding those tigers among men, viz., the sons
of Pandu, on their cars, the kings (on their side) with Dhrishtadyumna
and others, once more set up shouts of joy. And beholding the nobility of
the sons of Pandu who had paid due honour to those that were deserving of
honour, all the kings there present applauded them highly. And the
monarchs, talked with one another about the friendship, the compassion,
and the kindness to kinsmen, displayed at the proper season by those
high-souled personages. Excellent,--Excellent,--were the delightful words
everywhere bruited about, coupled with eulogistic hymns about those
famous men. And in consequence of this the minds and hearts of every one
there were attracted towards them. And the Mlechchhas and the Aryas there
who witnessed or heard of that behaviour of the sons of Pandu, all wept
with choked voices. And those warriors then, endued with great energy,
caused large drums and Pushkaras by hundreds upon hundreds to be sounded
and also blew their conches all white as the milk of cows.'"
