
SECTION XCIV
"Janamejaya said, 'O adorable one, I desire to hear the histories of
those kings who were descended from Puru. O tell me of each as he was
possessed of prowess and achievements. I have, indeed, heard that in
Puru's line there was not a single one who was wanting in good behaviour
and prowess, or who was without sons. O thou of ascetic wealth, I desire
to hear the histories in detail of those famous monarchs endued with
learning and all accomplishments.'
"Vaisampayana said, 'Asked by thee, I shall tell thee all about the
heroic-kings in Puru's line, all equal unto Indra in prowess, possessing
great affluence and commanding the respect of all for their
accomplishments.
"Puru had by his wife Paushti three sons, Pravira, Iswara, and Raudraswa,
all of whom were mighty car-warriors. Amongst them, Pravira was the
perpetuator of the dynasty. Pravira had by his wife Suraseni a son named
Manasyu. And the latter of eyes like lotus-petals had his sway over the
whole Earth bounded by the four seas. And Manasyu had for his wife
Sauviri. And he begat upon her three sons called Sakta, Sahana, and
Vagmi. And they were heroes in battle and mighty car-warriors. The
intelligent and virtuous Kaudraswa begat upon the Apsara Misrakesi ten
sons who were all great bowmen. And they all grew up into heroes,
performing numerous sacrifices in honour of the gods. And they all had
sons, were learned in all branches of knowledge and ever devoted to
virtue. They are Richeyu, and Kaksreyu and Vrikeyu of great prowess;
Sthandileyu, and Vaneyu, and Jaleyu of great fame; Tejeyu of great
strength and intelligence; and Satyeyu of the prowess of Indra; Dharmeyu,
and Sannateyu the tenth of the prowess of the celestials. Amongst them
all, Richeyu became the sole monarch of the whole earth and was known by
the name of Anadhrishti. And in prowess he was like unto Vasava amongst
the celestials. And Anadhristi had a son of the name of Matinara who
became a famous and virtuous king and performed the Rajasuya and the
horse-sacrifice. And Matinara had four sons of immeasurable prowess,
viz., Tansu, Mahan, Atiratha, and Druhyu of immeasurable glory. (Amongst
them, Tansu of great prowess became the perpetrator of Puru's line). And
he subjugated the whole earth and acquired great fame and splendour. And
Tansu begat a son of great prowess named Ilina. And he became the
foremost of all conquerors and brought the whole world under his
subjection. And Ilina begat upon his wife Rathantara five sons with
Dushmanta at their head, all equal in might unto the five elements. They
were Dushmanta, Sura, Bhima, Pravasu, and Vasu. And, O Janamejaya, the
eldest of them, Dushmanta, became king. And Dushmanta had by his wife
Sakuntala an intelligent son named Bharata who became king. And Bharata
gave his name to the race of which he was the founder. And it is from him
that the fame of that dynasty hath spread so wide. And Bharata begat upon
his three wives nine sons in all. But none of them were like their father
and so Bharata was not at all pleased with them. Their mothers,
therefore, became angry and slew them all. The procreation of children by
Bharata, therefore, became vain. The monarch then performed a great
sacrifice and through the grace of Bharadwaja obtained a son named
Bhumanyu. And then Bharata, the great descendant of Puru, regarding
himself as really possessing a son, installed, O foremost one of
Bharata's race, that son as his heir-apparent. And Bhumanyu begat upon
his wife, Pushkarini six sons named Suhotra, Suhotri, Suhavih, Sujeya,
Diviratha and Kichika. The eldest of them all, Suhotra, obtained the
throne and performed many Rajasuyas and horse-sacrifices. And Suhotra
brought under his sway the whole earth surrounded by her belt of seas and
full of elephants, kine and horses, and all her wealth of gems of gold.
And the earth afflicted with the weight of numberless human beings and
elephants, horses, and cats, was, as it were, about to sink. And during
the virtuous reign of Suhotra the surface of the whole earth was dotted
all over with hundreds and thousands, of sacrificial stakes. And the lord
of the earth, Suhotra, begat, upon his wife Aikshaki three sons, viz.,
Ajamidha, Sumidha, and Purumidha. The eldest of them, Ajamidha, was the
perpetuator of the royal line. And he begat six sons,--Riksha was born of
the womb of Dhumini, Dushmanta and Parameshthin, of Nili, and Jahnu, Jala
and Rupina were born in that of Kesini. All the tribes of the Panchalas
are descended from Dushmanta and Parameshthin. And the Kushikas are the
sons of Jahnu of immeasurable prowess. And Riksha who was older than both
Jala and Rupina became king. And Riksha begat Samvarana, the perpetuator
of the royal line. And, O king, it hath been heard by us that while
Samvarana, the son of Riksha, was ruling the earth, there happened a
great loss of people from famine, pestilence, drought, and disease. And
the Bharata princes were beaten by the troops of enemies. And the
Panchalas setting out to invade the whole earth with their four kinds of
troops soon brought the whole earth under their sway. And with their ten
Akshauhinis the king of the Panchalas defeated the Bharata prince.
Samvarana then with his wife and ministers, sons and relatives, fled in
fear, and took shelter in the forest on the banks of the Sindhu extending
to the foot of the mountains. There the Bharatas lived for a full
thousand years, within their fort. And after they had lived there a
thousand years, one day the illustrious Rishi Vasishtha approached the
exiled Bharatas, who, on going out, saluted the Rishi and worshipped him
by the offer of Arghya. And entertaining him with reverence, they
represented everything unto that illustrious Rishi. And after he was
seated on his seat, the king himself approached the Rishi and addressed
him, saying, 'Be thou our priest, O illustrious one! We will endeavour to
regain our kingdom.' And Vasishtha answered the Bharatas by saying, 'Om'
(the sign of consent). It hath been heard by us that Vasishtha then
installed the Bharata prince in the sovereignty of all the Kshatriyas on
earth, making by virtue of his Mantras this descendant of Puru the
veritable horns of the wild bull or the tusks of the wild elephants. And
the king retook the capital that had been taken away from him and once
more made all monarchs pay tribute to him. The powerful Samvarana, thus
installed once more in the actual sovereignty of the whole earth,
performed many sacrifices at which the presents to the Brahmanas were
great.
"Samvarana begat upon his wife, Tapati, the daughter of Surya, a son
named Kuru. This Kuru was exceedingly virtuous, and therefore, he was
installed on the throne by his people. It is after his name that the
field called Kuru-jangala has become so famous in the world. Devoted to
asceticism, he made that field (Kurukshetra) sacred by practising
asceticism there. And it has been heard by us that Kuru's highly
intelligent wife, Vahini, brought forth five sons, viz., Avikshit,
Bhavishyanta, Chaitraratha, Muni and the celebrated Janamejaya. And
Avikshit begat Parikshit the powerful, Savalaswa, Adhiraja, Viraja,
Salmali of great physical strength, Uchaihsravas, Bhangakara and Jitari
the eighth. In the race of these were born, as the fruit of their pious
acts seven mighty car-warriors with Janamejaya at their head. And unto
Parikshit were born sons who were all acquainted with (the secrets of)
religion and profit. And they were named Kakshasena and Ugrasena, and
Chitrasena endued with great energy, and Indrasena and Sushena and
Bhimasena. And the sons of Janamejaya were all endued with great strength
and became celebrated all over the world. And they were Dhritarashtra who
was the eldest, and Pandu and Valhika, and Nishadha endued with great
energy, and then the mighty Jamvunada, and then Kundodara and Padati and
then Vasati the eighth. And they were all proficient in morality and
profit and were kind to all creatures. Among them Dhritarashtra became
king. And Dhritarashtra had eight sons, viz., Kundika, Hasti, Vitarka,
Kratha the fifth, Havihsravas, Indrabha, and Bhumanyu the invincible, and
Dhritarashtra had many grandsons, of whom three only were famous. They
were, O king, Pratipa, Dharmanetra, Sunetra. Among these three, Pratipa
became unrivalled on earth. And, O bull in Bharata's race, Pratipa begat
three sons, viz., Devapi, Santanu, and the mighty car-warrior Valhika.
The eldest Devapi adopted the ascetic course of life, impelled thereto by
the desire of benefiting his brothers. And the kingdom was obtained by
Santanu and the mighty car-warrior Valhika.
"O monarch, besides, there were born in the race of Bharata numberless
other excellent monarchs endued with great energy and like unto the
celestial Rishis themselves in virtue and ascetic power. And so also in
the race of Manu were born many mighty car-warriors like unto the
celestials themselves, who by their number swelled the Aila dynasty into
gigantic proportions.'"
accomplishments.
