SECTION LI
Sanjaya said, "Beholding the mighty and terrible array called Krauncha
formed by Pandu's son of immeasurable energy, thy son, approaching the
preceptor, and Kripa, and Salya, O sire, and Somadatta's son, and
Vikarna, and Aswatthaman also, and all his brothers too, headed by
Dussasana, O Bharata, and other immeasurable heroes assembled there for
battle, said these timely words, gladdening them all, 'Armed with various
kinds of weapons, ye all are conversant with the meaning of the
scriptures. Ye mighty car-warriors, each of you is singly capable of
slaying in battle the sons of Pandu with their troops. How much more
then, when ye are united together. Our host, therefore, which is
protected by Bhishma, is immeasurable, while that host of theirs, which
is protected by Bhima, is measurable.[359] Let the Samsthanas, the
Surasenas, the Venikas, the Kukkuras, the Rechakas, the Trigartas, the
Madrakas, the Yavanas, with Satrunjayas, and Dussasana, and that
excellent hero Vikarna, and Nanda and Upanandaka, and Chitrasena, along
with the Manibhadrakas, protect Bhishma with their (respective)
troops,'--Then Bhishma and Drona and thy sons, O sire, formed a mighty
array for resisting that of the Parthas. And Bhishma, surrounded by a
large body of troops, advanced, leading a mighty army, like the chief of
the celestials himself. And that mighty bowman, the son of Bharadwaja,
endued with great energy, followed him with the Kuntalas, the Dasarnas,
and the Magadhas, O king, and with the Vidarbhas, the Melakas, the
Karnas, and the Pravaranas also. And the Gandharas, the Sindhusauviras,
the Sivis and the Vasatis with all their combatants also, (followed)
Bhishma, that ornament of battle, and Sakuni, with all his troops
protected the son of Bharadwaja. And then king Duryodhana, united with
all his brothers, with the Aswalakas, the Vikarnas, the Vamanas, the
Kosalas, the Daradas, the Vrikas, as also the Kshudrakas and the Malavas
advanced cheerfully against the Pandava host. And Bhurisravas, and Sala,
and Salya, and Bhagadatta, O sire, and Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti,
protected the left flank. And Somadatta, and Susarman, and Sudakshina,
the ruler of the Kamvojas and Satayus, and Srutayus, were on the right
flank. And Aswatthaman, and Kripa, and Kritavarman of Satwata's race,
with a very large division of the troops, were, stationed at the rear of
the army. And behind them were the rulers of many provinces, and Ketumat,
and Vasudana, and the powerful son of the king of Kasi. Then all the
troops on thy side cheerfully waiting for battle, O Bharata, blew their
conches with great pleasure, and set up leonine roars. And hearing the
shouts of those (combatants) filled with delight the venerable Kuru
grandsire, endued with great prowess, uttering a leonine roar, blew his
conch. Thereupon, conches and drums and diverse kinds of Pesis and
cymbals, were sounded at once by others, and the noise made became a loud
uproar. And Madhava and Arjuna, both stationed on a great car unto which
were yoked white steeds, blew their excellent conches decked with gold
and jewels. And Hrishikesa blew the conch called Panchajanya, and
Dhananjaya (that called) Devadatta. And Vrikodara of terrible deeds blew
the huge conch called Paundra. And Kunti's son king Yudhishthira blew the
conch called Anantavijaya, while Nakula and Sahadeva (those conches
called) Sughosa and Manipushpaka.[360] And the ruler of Kasi, and Saivya,
and Sikhandin the mighty car-warrior, and Dhrishtadyumna, and Virata, and
the mighty car-warrior Satyaki, and that great bowman the king of the
Panchalas, and the five sons of Draupadi, all blew their large conches
and set up leonine roars. And that great uproar uttered there by those
heroes, loudly reverberated through both the earth and the welkin. Thus,
O great king, the Kurus and the Pandavas, both filled with delight,
advanced against each other for battling again, and scorching each other
thus."
