SECTION LIII
Dhritarashtra said, "Tell me, O Sanjaya, how that great bowman Drona and
the Panchala prince of Prishata's race encounter each other in battle,
each striving his best. I regard destiny to be superior, O Sanjaya, to
exertion, when Santanu's son Bhishma (even) could not escape Pandu's son
in battle. Indeed, Bhishma, when enraged in battle could destroy all
mobile and immobile creatures, why, O Sanjaya, could he not then by his
prowess, escape the son of Pandu in battle?"
Sanjaya said, 'Listen, O king, quietly to this terrific battle. The son
of Pandu is incapable of being vanquished by the very gods with Vasava.
Drona with diverse arrows pierced Dhrishtadyumna and felled the latter's
charioteer from his niche in the car.[362] And, O sire, the enraged hero
also afflicted Dhrishtadyumna's four steeds with four excellent shafts.
And the heroic Dhrishtadyumna too pierced Drona in the combat with nine
sharp arrows and addressed him, saying, 'Wait--Wait'. 'Then, again,
Bharadwaja's son of great prowess and immeasurable soul, covered with his
arrows the wrathful Dhrishtadyumna. And he took up a dreadful arrow for
the destruction of Prishata's son whose force resembled that of Sakra's
bolt and which was like a second rod of death. And beholding that arrow
aimed by Bharadwaja in battle, loud cries of oh and alas arose, O
Bharata, among all the combatants. And then we beheld the wonderful
prowess of Dhrishtadyumna insomuch that the hero stood alone, immovable
like a mountain. And he cut off that terrible and blazing arrow coming
towards him like his own Death, and also showered an arrowy downpour on
Bharadwaja's son. And beholding that difficult feat achieved by
Dhrishtadyumna, the Panchalas with the Pandavas, filled with delight, set
up loud shouts. And that prince, endued with great prowess, desirous of
slaying Drona hurled at him a dart of great impetuosity, decked with gold
and stones of lapis lazuli. Thereupon the son of Bharadwaja, smiling the
while, cut off into three fragments that dart decked with gold that was
coming towards him impetuously. Beholding his dart thus baffled,
Dhrishtadyumna of great prowess rained arrowy downpours on Drona, O king.
Then that mighty car-warrior Drona, baffling that arrowy shower, cut off
when the opportunity presented, the bow of Drupada's son. His bow (thus)
cut off in the combat, that mighty warrior of great fame hurled at Drona
a heavy mace endued with the strength of the mountain. And hurled from
his hands, that mace coursed through the air for Drona's destruction. And
then we beheld the wonderful prowess of Bharadwaja's son. By (the)
lightness (of his car's motion), he baffled that mace decked with gold,
and having baffled it, he shot at Prishata's son many shafts of sharp
edge, well-tempered, furnished with golden wings, and whetted on stone.
And these, penetrating through Prishata's coat of mail, drank his blood
in that battle. Then the high-souled Dhrishtadyumna, taking up another
bow, and putting forth his prowess pierced Drona in that encounter with
five shafts. And then those two bulls among men, both covered with blood,
looked beautiful like two blossoming Kinsukas in spring variegated with
flowers. Then, O king, excited with wrath and putting forth his prowess
at the head of his division, Drona once more cut off the bow of Drupada's
son. And then that hero of immeasurable soul covered that warrior whose
bow was cut off, with innumerable straight arrows like the clouds
showering rain on a mountain. And he also felled his foe's charioteer
from his niche in the car. And his four steeds, too, with four sharp
arrows, Drona felled in that combat that set up a leonine roar. And with
another shaft he cut off the leathern fence that cased Dhrishtadyumna's
hand. His bow cut off, deprived of car, his steeds slain, and charioteer
overthrown, the prince of Panchala alighted from his car, mace in hand,
displaying great prowess. But before he could come down from his car, O
Bharata, Drona with his shafts cut off that mace into fragments. This
feat seemed wonderful to us. And then the mighty prince of the Panchalas
of strong arms, taking a large and beautiful shield decked with a hundred
moons, and a large scimitar of beautiful make, rushed impetuously from
desire of slaying Drona, like a hungry lion in the forest towards an
infuriate elephant. Then wonderful was the prowess that we behold of
Bharadwaja's son, and his lightness (of hand) in the use of weapons, as
also the strength of his arms, O Bharata, in as much as, alone, he
checked Prishata's son with a shower of arrows. And although possessed of
great might in battle, he was unable to proceed further. And we behold
the mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna staying where he did and warding
off those clouds of arrows with his shield, using his arms with great
dexterity. Then the mighty-armed Bhima endued with great strength quickly
came there, desirous of aiding in battle the high-souled son of Prishata.
And he pierced Drona, O king, with seven sharp-pointed arrows, and
speedily caused Prishata's son to be taken up on another car. Then king
Duryodhana urged the ruler of the Kalingas supported by a large division,
for the protection of Bharadwaja's son. Then that terrible and mighty
division of the Kalingas, O ruler of men, rushed against Bhima at the
command of thy son. And Drona then, that foremost of car-warriors,
abandoning the prince of Panchala, encountered Virata and Drupada
together. And Dhrishtadyumna also proceeded to support king Yudhishthira
in battle. And then commenced a fierce battle, making the hair stand on
end, between the Kalingas and the high-souled Bhima, a battle that was
destructive of the universe, terrific, and awful."
