SECTION LXIII
Sanjaya said, "When that elephant division was exterminated, thy son
Duryodhana urged his entire army, commanding the warriors to slay
Bhimasena. Then the entire army at the command of thy son, rushed towards
Bhimasena who was uttering fierce shouts. That vast and unlimited host
difficult of being borne by the very gods, incapable of being crossed
like the surging sea on the day of full moon or new moon, abounding with
cars, elephants, and steeds, resounding with the blare of conches and the
beat of drums, numbering untold foot-soldiers and car-warriors, and
shrouded by the dust (raised), that very sea of hostile troops incapable
of being agitated, thus coming towards him, Bhimasena checked in battle,
O king, like the bank resisting the ocean. That feat, O king, which we
beheld, of Bhimasena the high-souled son of Pandu, was exceedingly
wonderful and superhuman. With his mace, he fearlessly checked all those
kings angrily rushing towards him, with their steeds and cars, and
elephants. Checking that vast force with mace, that foremost of mighty
men, Bhima, stood in that fierce melee, immovable as the mountain Meru.
And in that dreadful, fierce, and terrific encounter his brother and sons
and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's race, and the sons of Draupadi and
Abhimanyu, and the unvanquished Sikhandin--these mighty warriors,--did
not abandon him from fear. Taking up his massive and weighty mace made of
Saika iron, he rushed towards the warriors of thy army like the Destroyer
himself, armed with his club. And pressing crowds of cars and crowds of
horsemen down into the earth, Bhima wandered over the field like the fire
at the end of the Yuga. And Pandu's son of infinite prowess crushing
crowds of cars with the impetus of his thighs and slaying thy warriors in
battle, wandered like the Destroyer himself at the end of the Yuga. And
he began to grind thy troops with the greatest ease like an elephant
crushing a forest of reeds. And dragging car-warriors down from their
cars, and warriors fighting from the backs of heroes, and foot soldiers
as they stood on the ground, in the army of thy son, the mighty-armed
Bhimasena slew them all with his mace like the wind crushing trees by its
force. And that mace of his, slaying elephants and steeds, became smeared
with fat, marrow, flesh, and blood, and looked exceedingly terrible. And
with the bodies of slain men and cavalry lying scattered about, the field
of battle wore the appearance of the abode of Yama. And the terrible and
slaughtering mace of Bhimasena, resembling the fierce bludgeon of Death
and endued with the effulgence of Indra's bolt, looked like Pinaka of the
angry Rudra while destroying living creatures. Indeed, that mace of the
high-souled son of Kunti, who was slaying all around, looked fiercely
resplendent like the bludgeon of the Destroyer himself at the time of the
universal dissolution. And beholding him thus routing that large army
repeatedly and advancing like Death's self, all the warriors became
cheerless. Withersoever the son of Pandu, raising his mace, cast his
eyes, in consequence of his look alone, O Bharata, all the troops there
seemed to melt away. Beholding Vrikodara of terrible deeds, thus routing
the army and unvanquished by even so large a force and devouring the
(hostile) division like the Destroyer himself with wide-open mouth,
Bhimasena speedily came towards him, on his car of solar effulgence and
rattle loud as that of the clouds, (shrouding the welkin) with his arrowy
showers like a vapoury canopy charged with rain. Then the mighty-armed
Bhimasena, beholding Bhishma thus advancing like the Destroyer himself
with wide-open mouth, rushed towards him, excited with wrath. At that
moment, that foremost hero of Sini's race viz., Satyaki of sure aim, fell
upon the grandsire, slaying his enemies (along the way) with his firm bow
and causing thy son's army to tremble. And all the combatants who
belonged to thy army were then, O Bharata, unable to impede the progress
of that hero thus advancing with his steeds of silvery hue and scattering
his sharp shafts furnished with handsome wings. At that time the Rakshasa
Alamvusha (only) succeeded in piercing him with ten shafts. But piercing
Alamvusha in return with four shafts, the grandson of Sini proceeded on
his car. Beholding that hero of Vrishni's race thus advancing and rolling
(as it were) through the very midst of his enemies, and checking (as he
proceeded) the foremost of Kuru warriors, and repeatedly uttering loud
shouts in that battle, thy warriors then like masses of clouds pouring
rain in torrents on the mountain breast, showered their arrowy downpours
on him. They were, however, incapable of impeding the progress of that
hero who looked like the noon-day sun in his glory. And there was none
who was not then cheerless, save Somadatta's son, O king, and
Bhurisravas, the son of Somadatta, O Bharata, beholding the car-warriors
of his own side driven away, rushed against Satyaki from desire of
battle, taking up his bow of fierce impetus."
