SECTION LXI
Sanjaya said, "And Drona's son, and Bhurisravas, and Chitrasena, O sire,
and the son of Samyamani also, all fought with Subhadra's son. And while
fighting alone with five tigers among men, people beheld him possessed of
exceeding energy, like a young lion fighting with five elephants. And no
one among them equalled Krishna's son in sureness of aim, in bravery, in
prowess, in lightness of hand or in knowledge of weapons. And beholding
his son, that chastiser of foes thus struggling and displaying his
prowess in battle, Partha set up a leonine roar. And seeing thy grandson,
O king, thus afflicting thy host, thy warriors, O monarch, surrounded him
on all sides. Then that smiter of foes, the son of Subhadra, depending
upon his prowess and might, advanced with undepressed heart against the
Dhartarashtra host. And while battling with the foe in that conflict, his
mighty bow endued with the effulgence of the sun, was seen by all to be
incessantly stretched for striking. And piercing the son of Drona with
one shaft, and Salya with five, he overthrew the standard of Samyamani's
son with eight shafts. And with another sharp-edged arrow he cut off the
mighty dart of golden staff, resembling a snake, that was hurled at him
by Somadatta's son. And the heir of Arjuna, baffling in the very sight of
Salya, his hundreds of terrible shafts, slew his four steeds. Thereupon
Bhurisravas, and Salya, and Drona's son and Samyamani, and Sala struck
with the fear at the strength of arms displayed by Krishna's son could
not stay before him. Then, O great king, the Trigartas and the Madras,
with the Kekayas, numbering five and twenty thousand urged by thy son,
all of whom were foremost of men accomplished in the science of arms and
who were incapable of defeat by foes in battle, surrounded Kiritin with
his son for slaying them both. Then, O king, that vanquisher of foes, the
commander of the Pandava army, the prince of the Panchalas, beheld the
cars of the father and the son (thus) surrounded (by the foe). Supported
by many thousands of elephants and cars, and by hundred thousands of
cavalry and infantry, and stretching his bow in great wrath he advanced
against that division of the Madras and the Kekayas, O chastiser of foes,
leading his troops with him. And that division (of the Pandava army),
protected by that renowned and firm bowman, and consisting of cars,
elephants, and cavalry, looked resplendent as it advanced for the
encounter. And while proceeding towards Arjuna, that perpetuator of
Panchala's race struck Saradwat's son on his shoulder-joint with three
arrows. And piercing the Madrakas then with ten sharp shafts, he speedily
slew the protector of Kritavarman's rear. And that chastiser of foes
then, with a shaft of broad head, slew Damana, the heir of the
high-souled Paurava. Then the son of Samyamani pierced the Panchala
prince incapable of defeat in the battle with ten shafts, and his
charioteer also with ten shafts. Then that mighty bowman, (thus) severely
pierced, licked with his tongue the corners of his mouth, and cut off his
enemy's bow with a broad-headed shaft of excessive sharpness. And soon
the prince of Panchala afflicted his foe with five and twenty arrows, and
then slew his steeds, O king, and then both the protectors of his wings.
Then, O bull of Bharata's race, Samyamani's son, standing on that car
whose steeds were slain, looked at the son of the renowned king of the
Panchalas. Then taking up a terrible scimitar of the best kind, made of
steel, Samyamani's son walking on foot, approached Drupada's son staying
on his car. And the Pandavas, soldiers and Dhrishtadyumna also of
Prishata's race beheld him coming like a wave and resembling a snake
fallen from the skies. And he whirled his sword and looked like the sun
and advanced with the tread of an infuriate elephant. The prince of
Panchala then, excited with rage, quickly taking up a mace, smashed the
head of Samyamani's son thus advancing towards him, sharp-edged scimitar
in grasp and shield in hand, as soon as the latter, having crossed the
shooting distance, was near enough to his adversary's car. And then, O
king, while falling down deprived of life, his blazing scimitar and
shield, loosened from his grasp, fell down with his body on the ground.
And the high-souled son of the Panchala king, of terrible prowess, having
slain his foe with his mace, won great renown. And when that prince, that
mighty car-warrior and great bowman, was (thus) slain, loud cries of oh
and alas arose among thy troops, O sire. Then Samyamani, excited with
rage upon beholding his own son slain, impetuously rushed towards the
prince of Panchala who was incapable of defeat in battle. And all the
kings of both the Kuru and the Pandava armies beheld those two princes
and foremost of car-warriors engaged in battle. Then that slayer of
hostile heroes Samyamani, excited with wrath, struck Prishata's son with
three shafts like (the conductor of an elephant striking) a mighty
elephant with hooks. And so Salya also, that ornament of assemblies,
excited with wrath, struck the heroic son of Prishata on his breast. And
then commenced (another) battle (there)."
