SECTION LXXII
Sanjaya said, "Sikhandin with Virata king of the Matsyas speedily
approached Bhishma that invincible and mighty bowman. And Dhananjaya
encountered Drona and Kripa, and Vikarna and many other kings, brave in
battle, all mighty bowmen endued with great strength, as also that mighty
bowman the ruler of the Sindhus supported by his friends and kinsmen and
many kings of the west and the south also, O bull of Bharata's race. And
Bhimasena proceeded against that mighty bowman, viz., thy vindictive son
Duryodhana, and also against Dussaha. And Sahadeva proceeded against
those invincible warriors, viz., Sakuni and that mighty car-warrior
Uluka, those great bowmen, who were sire and son. And that mighty
car-warrior Yudhishthira, deceitfully treated by thy son, proceeded in
that battle, O king, against the elephant division (of the Kauravas). And
that son of Pandu and Madri, viz., the heroic Nakula capable of wringing
tears from the foe, engaged in battle with the excellent car-warriors of
the Trigartas. And those invincible warriors, viz., Satyaki and
Chekitana, and the mighty son of Subhadra, proceeded against Salya and
the Kaikeyas. And Dhrishtaketu and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha, both
invincible in battle, proceeded against the car-division of thy sons. And
that mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna, that generalissimo (of the
Pandava forces) of immeasurable soul, engaged in battle, O king, with
Drona of fierce achievements. And it was thus that those heroic and
mighty bowmen of thy army and the Pandavas, engaged in battle, began to
strike one another. And when the sun had reached the meridian and the sky
was brilliantly illumined by his rays, the Kauravas and the Pandavas
began to slay one another. Then cars, furnished with standards from whose
tops pennons were afloat, variegated with gold and covered with
tiger-skins, looked beautiful as they moved on the field of battle. And
the shouts of warriors engaged in battle from desire of vanquishing one
another, became as loud as leonine roars. And that encounter which we
beheld between the heroic Srinjayas and the Kurus, was fierce in the
extreme and highly wonderful. And in consequence of the arrows shot all
around, we could not, O king, distinguish, O chastiser of foes, the
firmament, the sun and the cardinal and the subsidiary points of the
compass. And the splendour, like that of the blue lotus, of darts with
polished points, of bearded lances hurled (at the foe), of well-tempered
sabres and scimitars, of variegated coats of mail and of the ornaments
(on the persons of the warriors), illumined the welkin and the cardinal
and the subsidiary points with its effulgence. And the field of battle in
many places, O king, shone in consequence of the bodies of monarchs whose
effulgence resembled that of the moon and the sun. And brave
car-warriors, tigers among men shone in that battle, O king, like the
planets in the firmament. And Bhishma, that foremost of car-warriors,
excited with rage, checked the mighty Bhimasena in the very sight of the
troops. And the impetuous shafts shot by Bhishma, furnished with golden
wings, and whetted on stone, and rubbed with oil pierced Bhima in that
battle. Then Bhimasena endued with great strength hurled at him, O
Bharata, a dart of fierce impetuosity that resembled a wrathful snake.
But Bhishma in that combat cut off with straight shafts that dart with
staff made of gold and difficult of being borne, as it coursed
impetuously towards him. And with another broad-headed shaft, sharp and
well-tempered, he cut off Bhimasena's bow, O Bharata, into two parts.
Then, O king, in that battle, Satyaki, coming quickly towards Bhishma,
pierced thy sire with innumerable keen-edged and sharp-pointed shafts of
fierce impetuosity shot from his bowstring drawn to the ear. Then
Bhishma, aiming an exceedingly fierce shaft, felled the charioteer of the
Vrishni hero from his box in the car. And when the charioteer of
Satyaki's car was thus slain, his steeds, O king, bolted away. Endued
with the speed of the tempest or the mind, they ran wild over the field.
Then cries were uttered by the whole army which became a loud uproar. And
exclamation of oh and alas arose from the high-souled warriors of the
Pandava army. And those cries-said--Run, seize, check the horses, go in
haste. And this uproar followed Yuyudhana's car. Meanwhile, Bhishma the
son of Santanu began to slay the Pandava forces like Indra slaying the
Danavas. But the Panchalas and the Somakas, though slain by Bhishma thus,
forming yet a laudable resolution, rushed towards Bhishma. And other
warriors of the Pandava army, headed by Dhrishtadyumna, and desirous of
slaughtering the ranks of thy son, rushed towards Santanu's son in that
battle. And so also, O king, the warriors of thy army, headed by Bhishma
and Drona, impetuously rushed towards their foes. And thereupon another
battle took place."
