
SECTION XCVII
"Vaisampayana said. 'There was a king of the name of Pratipa, who was
kind to all creatures. He spent many years in ascetic penances at the
source of the river Ganga. The accomplished and lovely Ganga, one day,
assuming the form of a beautiful female, and rising from the waters, made
up to the monarch. The celestial maiden, endued with ravishing beauty,
approached the royal sage engaged in ascetic austerities, and sat upon
his right thigh that was, for manly strength, a veritable Sala tree. When
the maiden of handsome face had so sat upon his lap, the monarch said
unto her, 'O amiable one, what dost thou desire? What shall I do?' The
damsel answered, 'I desire thee, O king, for my husband! O foremost one
of the Kurus, be mine! To refuse a woman coming of her own accord is
never applauded by the wise.' Pratipa answered, 'O thou of the fairest
complexion, moved by lust, I never go in unto others' wives or women that
are not of my order. This, indeed, is my virtuous vow.' The maiden
rejoined, 'I am not inauspicious or ugly. I am every way worthy of being
enjoyed. I am a celestial maiden of rare beauty; I desire thee for my
husband. Refuse me not, O king.' To this Pratipa answered, 'I am, 'O
damsel, abstaining from that course to which thou wouldst incite me. If I
break my vow, sin will overwhelm and kill me. O thou of the fairest
complexion, thou hast embraced me, sitting on my right thigh. But, O
timid one, know that this is the seat for daughters and daughters-in-law.
The left lap is for the wife, but thou hast not accepted that. Therefore,
O best of women, I cannot enjoy thee as an object of desire. Be my
daughter-in-law. I accept thee for my son!'
"The damsel then said, 'O virtuous one, let it be as thou sayest. Let me
be united with thy son. From my respect for thee, I shall be a wife of
the celebrated Bharata race. Ye (of the Bharata race) are the refuge of
all the monarchs on earth! I am incapable of numbering the virtues of
this race even within a hundred years. The greatness and goodness of many
celebrated monarchs of this race are limitless. O lord of all, let it be
understood now that when I become thy daughter-in-law, thy son shall not
be able to judge of the propriety of my acts. Living thus with thy son, I
shall do good to him and increase his happiness. And he shall finally
attain to heaven in consequence of the sons I shall bear him, and of his
virtues and good conduct.'
"Vaisampayana continued, 'O king, having said so, the celestial damsel
disappeared then and there. And the king, too, waited for the birth of
his son in order to fulfil his promise.'
"About this time Pratipa, that light of the Kuru race, that bull amongst
Kshatriyas, was engaged, along with his wife, in austerities from desire
of offspring. And when they had grown old, a son was born unto them. This
was no other than Mahabhisha. And the child was called Santanu because he
was born when his father had controlled his passions by ascetic penances.
And the best of Kurus, Santanu, knowing that region of indestructible
bliss can be acquired by one's deeds alone, became devoted to virtue.
When Santanu grew up into a youth, Pratipa addressed him and said, 'Some
time ago, O Santanu, a celestial damsel came to me for thy good. If thou
meetest that fair-complexioned one in secret and if she solicit thee for
children, accept her as thy wife. And, O sinless one, judge not of the
propriety or impropriety of her action and ask not who she is, or whose
or whence, but accept her as thy wife at my command!'" Vaisampayana
continued, 'Pratipa, having thus commanded his son Santanu and installed
him on his throne, retired into the woods. And king Santanu endued with
great intelligence and equal unto Indra himself in splendour, became
addicted to hunting and passed much of his time in the woods. And the
best of monarchs always slew deer and buffaloes. And one day, as he was
wandering along the bank of the Ganges, he came upon a region frequented
by Siddhas and Charanas. And there he saw a lovely maiden of blazing
beauty and like unto another Sri herself; of faultless and pearly teeth
and decked with celestial ornaments, and attired in garments of fine
texture that resembled in splendour the filaments of the lotus. And the
monarch, on beholding that damsel, became surprised, and his raptures
produced instant horripilation. With steadfast gaze he seemed to be
drinking her charms, but repeated draughts failed to quench his thirst.
The damsel also beholding the monarch of blazing splendour moving about
in great agitation, was moved herself and experienced an affection for
him. She gazed and gazed and longed to gaze on him evermore. The monarch
then in soft words addressed her and said, 'O slender-waisted one, be
thou a goddess or the daughter of a Danava, be thou of the race of the
Gandharvas, or Apsaras, be thou of the Yakshas or the Nagas, or be thou
of human origin, O thou of celestial beauty, I solicit thee to be my
wife!'"
