SECTION LXXV
Sanjaya said, "Having rested for a while, O king, both the Kurus and the
Pandavas, after the night had passed away, once more went out for battle.
And then loud was the uproar, O king, that arose of mighty car-warriors
as they prepared for battle, and of tuskers as these were being equipped
for the conflict, and of infantry as they put on their armour, and of
steeds also, O Bharata. And the blare of conches and the beat of drums
became deafening in all parts of the field. Then king Yudhishthira
addressed Dhrishtadyumna and said, 'O mighty-armed one, dispose the
troops in the array called Makara that scorcheth the foe.' Thus addressed
by Pritha's son, that mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna, that foremost of
combatants on cars, issued the order, O great king, to the car-warriors,
(for forming the Makara array). Drupada, and Dhananjaya the son of Pandu,
formed the head of that array, and Sahadeva and that mighty car-warrior
Nakula formed its two eyes. And the mighty Bhimasena formed its beak. And
Subhadra's son, and the sons of Draupadi and the Rakshasa Ghatotkacha,
and Satyaki, and king Yudhishthira the just, were stationed in its neck.
And king Virata that commander of a large division, formed its back,
supported by Dhrishtadyumna and a large force. And the five Kekaya
brothers consisted its left wing, and that tiger among men, viz.,
Dhrishtaketu, and Chekitana of great prowess, stationed in the right
wing, stood for protecting that array. And its two feet, O monarch, were
constituted by that mighty car-warrior the blessed Kuntibhoja, and
Satanika, supported by a large force. And that great bowman, the mighty
Sikhandin, surrounded by the Somakas, and Iravat, were stationed in the
tail of that Makara array. And having, O Bharata, formed their great
array, the Pandavas, O monarch, equipped in mail at dawn, again stood for
battle. And with elephants and steeds and cars and infantry, and with
standards upraised and umbrellas set up, and armed with bright, whetted
weapons, they quickly proceeded against the Kauravas.
"Then thy sire Devavrata, beholding the (Pandava) army thus arrayed,
disposed his army, O king, in counter-array after the form of a huge
crane. And in its beak was Bharadwaja's son (Drona). And Aswatthaman and
Kripa, O monarch, formed its two eyes. And that foremost, of all bowmen,
viz., Kritavarman, united with the ruler of the Kamvojas and with the
Valhikas was stationed, O king, in its head. And in its neck. O Bharata,
were Surasena, and thy son Duryodhana, O king, surrounded by many kings.
And the ruler of the Pragjyotishas, united with the Madras, the Sauviras,
and the Kekayas, and surrounded by a large force, was stationed, O king,
in its breasts. And Susarman the king of Prasthala, accompanied by his
own troops, stood, accoutred in mail, in the left wing. And the Tusharas,
the Yavanas and the Sakas, along with the Chulikas, stood in the right
wing, O Bharata, of that array. And Srutayush and Sataytish and
Somadatta's son, O sire, were stationed in the rear of that array
protecting one another.
"Then the Pandavas, O king, rushed against the Kauravas for battle. The
sun, O Bharata, had risen when the battle commenced. And elephants
proceeded against elephants. And horsemen rushed against horsemen,
car-warriors against car-warriors, O king, and against elephants also, in
that dreadful conflict. And car-men rushed against riders of elephants,
and riders of elephants against horsemen. And car-warriors engaged with
foot-soldiers, and cavalry with infantry. And all the warriors, O king,
excited with wrath, rushed against one another in battle. And the Pandava
army, protected by Bhimasena and Arjuna and the twins, looked beautiful
like the night decorated with stars. And thy army also, with Bhishma and
Kripa and Drona and Salya and Duryodhana, and others, shone like the
firmament spangled with the planets. And Bhimasena the son of Kunti,
endued with great prowess, beholding Drona rushed against the division of
Bharadwaja's son, borne by his steeds of great fleetness. Then Drona,
excited with wrath in that conflict and endued with great energy, pierced
Bhima with nine shafts made wholly of iron, aiming his vital limbs.
Deeply pierced by Bharadwaja's son in that conflict, Bhima despatched
Drona's charioteer to the region of Yama. Thereupon the son of
Bharadwaja, endued with great prowess, himself restraining his steeds,
began to consume the Pandava army like fire consuming a heap of cotton.
And while thus slaughtered, O king, by Drona and Bhishma, the Srinjayas
along with the Kekayas took to flight. And so thy troops also, mangled by
Bhima and Arjuna, became deprived of their senses as they stood, like a
beautiful female in her pride. And in that conflict destructive of heroes
great was the distress, O Bharata, that befell both thy army and theirs.
And we beheld the wonderful sight, O Bharata, of the troops fighting with
one another regardless of their lives.[403] And the Pandavas and the
Kauravas, O king, in that conflict, fought with one another counteracting
one another's weapons."
