SECTION XCV
Sanjaya said, "Beholding his own troops slain, king Duryodhana then
excited with wrath, rushed towards Bhimasena, that chastiser of foes.
Taking up a large bow whose effulgence resembled that of Indra's bolt, he
covered the son of Pandu with a thick shower of arrows. And filled with
rage, and aiming a sharp crescent-shaped shaft winged with feathers, he
cut off Bhimasena's bow. And that mighty car-warrior, noticing an
opportunity, quickly aimed at his adversary a whetted shaft capable of
riving the very hills. With that (shaft), that mighty-armed (warrior)
struck Bhimasena in the chest. Deeply pierced with that arrow, and
exceedingly pained, and licking the corners of his mouth, Bhimasena of
great energy caught hold of his flag-staff decked with gold. Beholding
Bhimasena in that cheerless state, Ghatotkacha blazed up with wrath like
an all-consuming conflagration. Then many mighty car-warriors of the
Pandava army, headed by Abhimanyu and with wrath generated (in their
bosoms), rushed at the king shouting loudly. Beholding them (thus)
advancing (to the fight) filled with wrath and in great fury,
Bharadwaja's son addressing the mighty car-warriors (of thy side), said
these words,--'Go quickly, blessed be ye, and protect the king. Sinking
in an ocean of distress, he is placed in a situation of great danger.
These mighty car-warriors of the Pandava army, these great bowmen,
placing Bhimasena at their head, are rushing towards Duryodhana, shooting
and hurling diverse kinds of weapons, resolved upon winning success,
uttering terrible shouts, and frightening the kings (on your side)'.
Hearing these words of the preceptor, many warriors of thy side headed by
Somadatta rushed upon the Pandava ranks. Kripa and Bhurisravas and Salya,
and Drona's son and Vivingsati, and Chitrasena and Vikarna, and the ruler
of the Sindhus, and Vrihadvala, and those two mighty bowmen, viz., the
two princes of Avanti, surrounded the Kuru king. Advancing only twenty
steps, the Pandavas and the Dhartarashtras began to strike, desirous of
slaughtering each other. The mighty-armed son of Bharadwaja also, having
said those words (unto the Dhartarashtra warriors), stretched his own
large bow and pierced Bhima with six and twenty arrows. And once again
that mighty car-warrior speedily covered Bhimasena with a shower of
arrows like a mass of clouds dropping torrents of rain on the
mountain-breasts in the rainy season. That mighty bowman Bhimasena,
however, of great strength, speedily pierced him in return with ten
shafts on the left side. Deeply pierced with those arrows and exceedingly
pained, O Bharata, the preceptor, enfeebled as he is with age, suddenly
sat down on the terrace of his car, deprived of consciousness. Beholding
him thus pained, king Duryodhana himself, and Aswatthaman also, excited
with wrath, both rushed towards Bhimasena. Beholding those two warriors
advance, each like Yama as he shows himself at the end of the Yuga, the
mighty-armed Bhimasena, quickly taking up a mace, and jumping down from
his car without loss of time, stood immovable like a hill, with that
heavy mace resembling the very club of Yama, upraised in battle.
Beholding him with mace (thus) upraised and looking (on that account)
like the crested Kailasa, both the Kuru king and Drona's son rushed
towards him. Then the mighty Bhimasena himself rushed impetuously at
those two foremost of men thus rushing together towards him with great
speed. Beholding him thus rushing in fury and with terrible expression of
face, many mighty car-warriors of the Kaurava army speedily proceeded
towards him. Those car-warriors headed by Bharadwaja's son, impelled by
the desire of slaughtering Bhimasena, hurled at his breast diverse kinds
of weapons, and thus all of them together afflicted Bhima from all sides.
Beholding that mighty car-warrior thus afflicted and placed in a
situation of great peril, many mighty car-warriors of the Pandava army,
headed by Abhimanyu, and prepared to lay down dear life itself, rushed to
the spot, desirous of rescuing him. The heroic ruler of the low country,
the dear friend of Bhima, viz., Nila, looking like a mass of blue clouds,
rushed at Drona's son, filled with wrath. A great bowman, Nila always
desired an encounter with Drona's son. Drawing his large bow, he pierced
the son of Drona with many winged arrows, like Sakra in days of old, O
king, piercing the invincible Danava Viprachitti, that terror of the
celestials, who, moved by anger frightened the three worlds by his
energy. Pierced after the same way by Nila with his well-shot arrows
winged with feathers, Drona's son, covered with blood and exceedingly
pained, was filled with wrath. Drawing then his large bow, of twang loud
as the roar of Indra's thunder, that foremost of intelligent persons set
his heart upon the destruction of Nila. Aiming then a few bright shafts
of broad heads and sharpened by the hands of their forger, he slew the
four steeds of his adversary and overthrew also his standard. And with
the seventh shaft he pierced Nila himself in the chest. Deeply pierced
and exceedingly pained, he sat down on the terrace of his car. Beholding
king Nila, who looked like a mass of blue clouds, in a swoon,
Ghatotkacha, filled with wrath and surrounded by his kinsmen, rushed
impetuously towards Drona's son, that ornament of battle. Similarly many
other Rakshasas, incapable of being easily defeated in battle, rushed at
Aswatthaman. Beholding then that Rakshasa of terrible mien coming towards
him, the valiant son of Bharadwaja impetuously rushed towards him. Filled
with wrath he slew many Rakshasas of formidable visage, that is, those
wrathful ones amongst them who were in Ghatotkacha's van. Beholding them
repulsed from the encounter by means of the shafts shot from the bow of
Drona's son, Bhimasena's son Ghatotkacha of gigantic size was filled with
rage. He then exhibited a fierce and awful illusion. Therewith that
prince of the Rakshasas, endued with extraordinary powers of illusion,
confounded the son of Drona in that battle. Then all thy troops, in
consequence of that illusion, turned their backs upon the field. They
beheld one another cut down and lying prostrate on the surface of the
earth, writhing convulsively, perfectly helpless, and bathed in blood.
Drona and Duryodhana and Salya and Aswatthaman, and other great bowmen
that were regarded as foremost among the Kauravas, also seemed to fly
away. All the car-warriors seemed to be crushed, and all the kings seemed
to be slain. And horses and horse-riders seemed to be cut down in
thousands. Beholding all this, thy troops fled away towards their tents.
And although, O king, both myself and Devavrata cried out at the top of
our voices, saying, 'Fight, do not fly away, all this is Rakshasa
illusion in battle, applied by Ghatotkacha.' Yet they stopped not, their
senses having been confounded. Although both of us said so, still struck
with panic, they gave no credit to our words. Beholding them fly away the
Pandavas regarded the victory to be theirs. With Ghatotkacha (among them)
they uttered many leonine shouts. And all around they filled the air with
their shouts mingled with the blare of their conches and the beat of
their drums. It was thus that thy whole army, routed by the wicked
Ghatotkacha, towards the hour of sunset, fled away in all directions.'"
